components/cover/custom.rst, before:

Custom Cover
============

This integration can be used to create custom covers in ESPHome
using the C++ (Arduino) API.

Please first read :doc:`/components/sensor/custom` guide,
the same principles apply here.

The example below is an example of a custom cover - all covers must override
two methods:

- ``get_traits``: This should return a :apiclass:`CoverTraits <cover::CoverTraits>` object
  representing the capabilities of the cover.
- ``control``: This receives a :apiclass:`CoverCall <cover::CoverCall>` object that contains
  the command the user tried to set.

.. code-block:: cpp

    #include "esphome.h"

    class MyCustomCover : public Component, public Cover {
     public:
      void setup() override {
        // This will be called by App.setup()
        pinMode(5, INPUT);
      }
      CoverTraits get_traits() override {
        auto traits = CoverTraits();
        traits.set_is_assumed_state(false);
        traits.set_supports_position(true);
        traits.set_supports_tilt(false);
        traits.set_supports_stop(true);
        return traits;
      }
      void control(const CoverCall &call) override {
        // This will be called every time the user requests a state change.
        if (call.get_position().has_value()) {
          float pos = *call.get_position();
          // Write pos (range 0-1) to cover
          // ...

          // Publish new state
          this->position = pos;
          this->publish_state();
        }
        if (call.get_stop()) {
          // User requested cover stop
        }
      }
    };

(Store this file in your configuration directory, for example ``my_cover.h``)

And in YAML:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    esphome:
      includes:
        - my_cover.h

    cover:
    - platform: custom
      lambda: |-
        auto my_custom_cover = new MyCustomCover();
        App.register_component(my_custom_cover);
        return {my_custom_cover};

      covers:
        - name: "My Custom Cover"

Configuration variables:

- **lambda** (**Required**, :ref:`lambda <config-lambda>`): The lambda to run for instantiating the
  cover(s).
- **covers** (**Required**, list): A list of covers to initialize. The length here
  must equal the number of items in the ``return`` statement of the ``lambda``.

  - All options from :ref:`Cover <config-cover>`.

See :apiclass:`Cover <cover::Cover>`

See Also
--------

- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add deprecation message to custom component pages (#3318)

components/cover/custom.rst, after:

Custom Cover
============

.. warning::

    Custom components are deprecated, not recommended for new configurations
    and will be removed from ESPHome in a future release.
    Please look at creating a real ESPHome component and "importing" it into your
    configuration with :doc:`/components/external_components`.

    You can find some basic documentation on creating your own components
    at :ref:`contributing_to_esphome`.

This integration can be used to create custom covers in ESPHome
using the C++ (Arduino) API.

Please first read :doc:`/components/sensor/custom` guide,
the same principles apply here.

The example below is an example of a custom cover - all covers must override
two methods:

- ``get_traits``: This should return a :apiclass:`CoverTraits <cover::CoverTraits>` object
  representing the capabilities of the cover.
- ``control``: This receives a :apiclass:`CoverCall <cover::CoverCall>` object that contains
  the command the user tried to set.

.. code-block:: cpp

    #include "esphome.h"

    class MyCustomCover : public Component, public Cover {
     public:
      void setup() override {
        // This will be called by App.setup()
        pinMode(5, INPUT);
      }
      CoverTraits get_traits() override {
        auto traits = CoverTraits();
        traits.set_is_assumed_state(false);
        traits.set_supports_position(true);
        traits.set_supports_tilt(false);
        traits.set_supports_stop(true);
        return traits;
      }
      void control(const CoverCall &call) override {
        // This will be called every time the user requests a state change.
        if (call.get_position().has_value()) {
          float pos = *call.get_position();
          // Write pos (range 0-1) to cover
          // ...

          // Publish new state
          this->position = pos;
          this->publish_state();
        }
        if (call.get_stop()) {
          // User requested cover stop
        }
      }
    };

(Store this file in your configuration directory, for example ``my_cover.h``)

And in YAML:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    esphome:
      includes:
        - my_cover.h

    cover:
    - platform: custom
      lambda: |-
        auto my_custom_cover = new MyCustomCover();
        App.register_component(my_custom_cover);
        return {my_custom_cover};

      covers:
        - name: "My Custom Cover"

Configuration variables:

- **lambda** (**Required**, :ref:`lambda <config-lambda>`): The lambda to run for instantiating the
  cover(s).
- **covers** (**Required**, list): A list of covers to initialize. The length here
  must equal the number of items in the ``return`` statement of the ``lambda``.

  - All options from :ref:`Cover <config-cover>`.

See :apiclass:`Cover <cover::Cover>`

See Also
--------

- :ghedit:`Edit`
