components/cover/index.rst, before:

Cover Component
===============

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up base covers in ESPHome.
    :image: folder-opn.png

The ``cover`` component is a generic representation of covers in ESPHome.
A cover can (currently) either be *closed* or *open* and supports three types of
commands: *open*, *close* and *stop*.

.. figure:: images/cover-ui.png
    :align: center
    :width: 75.0%

.. _config-cover:

Base Cover Configuration
------------------------

All cover config schemas inherit from this schema - you can set these keys for covers.

.. code-block:: yaml

    cover:
      - platform: ...
        device_class: garage

Configuration variables:

- **device_class** (*Optional*, string): The device class for the
  sensor. See https://www.home-assistant.io/components/cover/ for a list of available options.

Advanced options:

- **internal** (*Optional*, boolean): Mark this component as internal. Internal components will
  not be exposed to the frontend (like Home Assistant). Only specifying an ``id`` without
  a ``name`` will implicitly set this to true.
- If MQTT enabled, all other options from :ref:`MQTT Component <config-mqtt-component>`.

.. _cover-open_action:

``cover.open`` Action
---------------------

This :ref:`action <config-action>` opens the cover with the given ID when executed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - cover.open: cover_1

.. note::

    This action can also be expressed in :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`:

    .. code-block:: cpp

        auto call = id(cover_1).make_call();
        call.set_command_open();
        call.perform();

.. _cover-close_action:

``cover.close`` Action
----------------------

This :ref:`action <config-action>` closes the cover with the given ID when executed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - cover.close: cover_1

.. note::

    This action can also be expressed in :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`:

    .. code-block:: cpp

        auto call = id(cover_1).make_call();
        call.set_command_close();
        call.perform();

.. _cover-stop_action:

``cover.stop`` Action
---------------------

This :ref:`action <config-action>` stops the cover with the given ID when executed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - cover.stop: cover_1

.. note::

    This action can also be expressed in :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`:

    .. code-block:: cpp

        auto call = id(cover_1).make_call();
        call.set_command_stop();
        call.perform();

.. _cover-control_action:

``cover.control`` Action
------------------------

This :ref:`action <config-action>` is a more generic version of the other cover actions and
allows all cover attributes to be set.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - cover.control:
            id: cover_1
            position: 50%
            tilt: 50%

Configuration variables:

- **id** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The cover to control.
- **stop** (*Optional*, boolean): Whether to stop the cover.
- **state** (*Optional*, string): The state to set the cover to - one of ``OPEN`` or ``CLOSE``.
- **position** (*Optional*, float): The cover position to set.

  - ``0.0`` = ``0%`` = ``CLOSED``
  - ``1.0`` = ``100%`` = ``OPEN``

- **tilt** (*Optional*, float): The tilt position to set. In range 0% - 100%.

.. note::

    This action can also be expressed in :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`:

    .. code-block:: cpp

        auto call = id(cover_1).make_call();
        // set attributes
        call.set_position(0.5);
        call.perform();

.. _cover-lambda_calls:

lambda calls
------------

From :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`, you can call several methods on all covers to do some
advanced stuff.

- ``publish_state()``: Manually cause the cover to publish a new state and store it internally.
  If it's different from the last internal state, it's additionally published to the frontend.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      // Within lambda, make the cover report a specific state
      id(my_cover).publish_state(COVER_OPEN);
      id(my_cover).publish_state(COVER_CLOSED);

- ``state``: Retrieve the current state of the cover.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      if (id(my_cover).state == COVER_OPEN) {
        // Cover is open
      } else {
        // Cover is closed
      }

See Also
--------

- :apiref:`cover/cover.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1
    :glob:

    *

Commit message:

Add config option docs for disabled_by_default (#1361)

components/cover/index.rst, after:

Cover Component
===============

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up base covers in ESPHome.
    :image: folder-opn.png

The ``cover`` component is a generic representation of covers in ESPHome.
A cover can (currently) either be *closed* or *open* and supports three types of
commands: *open*, *close* and *stop*.

.. figure:: images/cover-ui.png
    :align: center
    :width: 75.0%

.. _config-cover:

Base Cover Configuration
------------------------

All cover config schemas inherit from this schema - you can set these keys for covers.

.. code-block:: yaml

    cover:
      - platform: ...
        device_class: garage

Configuration variables:

- **device_class** (*Optional*, string): The device class for the
  sensor. See https://www.home-assistant.io/components/cover/ for a list of available options.

Advanced options:

- **internal** (*Optional*, boolean): Mark this component as internal. Internal components will
  not be exposed to the frontend (like Home Assistant). Only specifying an ``id`` without
  a ``name`` will implicitly set this to true.
- **disabled_by_default** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, then this entity should not be added to any client's frontend,
  (usually Home Assistant) without the user manually enabling it (via the Home Assistant UI).
  Requires Home Assistant 2021.9 or newer. Defaults to ``false``.
- If MQTT enabled, all other options from :ref:`MQTT Component <config-mqtt-component>`.

.. _cover-open_action:

``cover.open`` Action
---------------------

This :ref:`action <config-action>` opens the cover with the given ID when executed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - cover.open: cover_1

.. note::

    This action can also be expressed in :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`:

    .. code-block:: cpp

        auto call = id(cover_1).make_call();
        call.set_command_open();
        call.perform();

.. _cover-close_action:

``cover.close`` Action
----------------------

This :ref:`action <config-action>` closes the cover with the given ID when executed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - cover.close: cover_1

.. note::

    This action can also be expressed in :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`:

    .. code-block:: cpp

        auto call = id(cover_1).make_call();
        call.set_command_close();
        call.perform();

.. _cover-stop_action:

``cover.stop`` Action
---------------------

This :ref:`action <config-action>` stops the cover with the given ID when executed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - cover.stop: cover_1

.. note::

    This action can also be expressed in :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`:

    .. code-block:: cpp

        auto call = id(cover_1).make_call();
        call.set_command_stop();
        call.perform();

.. _cover-control_action:

``cover.control`` Action
------------------------

This :ref:`action <config-action>` is a more generic version of the other cover actions and
allows all cover attributes to be set.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - cover.control:
            id: cover_1
            position: 50%
            tilt: 50%

Configuration variables:

- **id** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The cover to control.
- **stop** (*Optional*, boolean): Whether to stop the cover.
- **state** (*Optional*, string): The state to set the cover to - one of ``OPEN`` or ``CLOSE``.
- **position** (*Optional*, float): The cover position to set.

  - ``0.0`` = ``0%`` = ``CLOSED``
  - ``1.0`` = ``100%`` = ``OPEN``

- **tilt** (*Optional*, float): The tilt position to set. In range 0% - 100%.

.. note::

    This action can also be expressed in :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`:

    .. code-block:: cpp

        auto call = id(cover_1).make_call();
        // set attributes
        call.set_position(0.5);
        call.perform();

.. _cover-lambda_calls:

lambda calls
------------

From :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`, you can call several methods on all covers to do some
advanced stuff.

- ``publish_state()``: Manually cause the cover to publish a new state and store it internally.
  If it's different from the last internal state, it's additionally published to the frontend.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      // Within lambda, make the cover report a specific state
      id(my_cover).publish_state(COVER_OPEN);
      id(my_cover).publish_state(COVER_CLOSED);

- ``state``: Retrieve the current state of the cover.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      if (id(my_cover).state == COVER_OPEN) {
        // Cover is open
      } else {
        // Cover is closed
      }

See Also
--------

- :apiref:`cover/cover.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1
    :glob:

    *
