components/select/tuya.rst, before:

Tuya Select
===========

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up a Tuya device select.
    :image: upload.svg

The ``tuya`` select platform creates a select from a tuya serial component
and requires :doc:`/components/tuya` to be configured.

.. code-block:: text

    [08:51:09][C][tuya:032]: Tuya:
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:043]:   Datapoint 1: switch (value: ON)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:045]:   Datapoint 24: int value (value: 220)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:045]:   Datapoint 16: int value (value: 22)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:049]:   Datapoint 2: enum (value: 1)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:045]:   Datapoint 19: int value (value: 40)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:045]:   Datapoint 101: int value (value: 1)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:045]:   Datapoint 27: int value (value: -2)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:049]:   Datapoint 43: enum (value: 1)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:049]:   Datapoint 102: enum (value: 1)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:051]:   Datapoint 45: bitmask (value: 0)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:043]:   Datapoint 10: switch (value: ON)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:041]:   Datapoint 38: raw (value: 06.00.14.08.00.0F.0B.1E.0F.0C.1E.0F.11.00.16.16.00.0F.08.00.16.17.00.0F (24))
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:049]:   Datapoint 36: enum (value: 1)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:057]:   GPIO Configuration: status: pin 14, reset: pin 0 (not supported)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:061]:   Status Pin: GPIO14
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:063]:   Product: '{"p":"gogb05wrtredz3bs","v":"1.0.0","m":0}'

On this controller, the datapoint 36 represents the temperature sensor selection
setting which is what we are interested in controlling using this platform.

Based on this, you can create the select as follows:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Create a select
    select:
      - platform: "tuya"
        name: "Sensor selection"
        select_datapoint: 2
        optimistic: true
        options:
          - Internal
          - Floor
          - Both

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the switch.
- **select_datapoint** (**Required**, int): The datapoint id number of the select.
- **options** (**Required**, list): The list of options this Select has.
  At runtime, a zero based index will be automatically associated with each option in the order they are declared in config.
  This means than `Internal` will get index 0, `Floor` will get 1 and so on. The corresponding to the selected value
  associated index will be sent to datapoint.
- **optimistic** (*Optional*, boolean): Whether to operate in optimistic mode - when in this mode,
  any command sent to the Template Select will immediately update the reported state.

- All other options from :ref:`Select <config-select>`.

.. note::

    

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/select/index`
- :apiref:`tuya/select/tuya_select.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Change options type from list to map

components/select/tuya.rst, after:

Tuya Select
===========

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up a Tuya device select.
    :image: tuya.png

The ``tuya`` select platform creates a select from a tuya serial component
and requires :doc:`/components/tuya` to be configured.

.. code-block:: text

    [08:51:09][C][tuya:032]: Tuya:
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:043]:   Datapoint 1: switch (value: ON)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:045]:   Datapoint 24: int value (value: 220)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:045]:   Datapoint 16: int value (value: 22)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:049]:   Datapoint 2: enum (value: 1)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:045]:   Datapoint 19: int value (value: 40)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:045]:   Datapoint 101: int value (value: 1)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:045]:   Datapoint 27: int value (value: -2)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:049]:   Datapoint 43: enum (value: 1)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:049]:   Datapoint 102: enum (value: 1)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:051]:   Datapoint 45: bitmask (value: 0)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:043]:   Datapoint 10: switch (value: ON)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:041]:   Datapoint 38: raw (value: 06.00.14.08.00.0F.0B.1E.0F.0C.1E.0F.11.00.16.16.00.0F.08.00.16.17.00.0F (24))
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:049]:   Datapoint 36: enum (value: 1)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:057]:   GPIO Configuration: status: pin 14, reset: pin 0 (not supported)
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:061]:   Status Pin: GPIO14
    [08:51:09][C][tuya:063]:   Product: '{"p":"gogb05wrtredz3bs","v":"1.0.0","m":0}'

On this controller, the datapoint 36 represents the temperature sensor selection
setting which is what we are interested in controlling using this platform.

Based on this, you can create the select as follows:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Create a select
    select:
      - platform: "tuya"
        name: "Sensor selection"
        select_datapoint: 2
        optimistic: true
        options:
          Internal: 0
          Floor: 1
          Both: 2

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the switch.
- **select_datapoint** (**Required**, int): The datapoint id number of the select.
- **options** (**Required**, Map[str, int]): Provide a mapping from options (str) of
  this Select to values (int) of the *select_datapoint* and vice versa. All options and
  all values have to be unique.
- **optimistic** (*Optional*, boolean): Whether to operate in optimistic mode - when in this mode,
  any command sent to the Select will immediately update the reported state.

- All other options from :ref:`Select <config-select>`.


See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/select/index`
- :apiref:`tuya/select/tuya_select.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
