Changelog - Version 1.10.0
==========================

.. seo::
    :description: Changelog for esphomelib version 1.10.0.
    :image: /_static/changelog-1.10.0.png
    :author: Otto Winter
    :author_twitter: @OttoWinter_

.. imgtable::

    Native API, components/api, server-network.svg, dark-invert
    Dashboard+Hass.io Add-On Updates, guides/getting_started_hassio, home-assistant.svg, dark-invert
    Better Custom Components, components/sensor/custom, language-cpp.svg, dark-invert

    APDS9960, components/sensor/apds9960, apds9960.jpg
    MAX31855, components/sensor/max31855, max31855.jpg
    ULN2003, components/stepper/index, stepper.svg

    NeoPixelBus Light, components/light/neopixelbus, color_lens.svg, dark-invert
    ESP32 Ethernet, components/ethernet, ethernet.svg, dark-invert
    Home Assistant Sensor, components/sensor/homeassistant, home-assistant.svg, dark-invert


Native API
----------

This release brings with it lots of goodies, but most important is the :doc:`native API </components/api>`.
MQTT has been the only way this project communicated with Home Assistant for a while now. And MQTT is a great protocol
to get started, but it always had problems:

- Another service to install - Users would need to install an MQTT broker in order to get started.
- MQTT Discovery - Home Assistant's MQTT discovery has been great, but always had problems like retained messages etc.
- Inefficient - A typical MQTT message for sending a binary sensor state is about 70 bytes long, and the MQTT library
  we used was quite inefficient with runtime memory allocation too.

So I decided to do something against that: ESPHome now features a native protocol (based on TCP+protocol buffers)
that addresses these issues and has a
`component on the Home Assistant <https://rc--home-assistant-docs.netlify.com/components/esphome/>`__
side too.

**Does this mean MQTT will be removed?**

No! MQTT is an awesome protocol with easy integration for many tools like Node-RED and custom MQTT clients.
This native API is only for replacing communications with Home Assistant, so *if* anything gets removed it's
MQTT auto discovery for Home Assistant. Of course both can be used together at the same time too.

**Should I switch to the native API immediately?**

You definitely can, but a word of warning first: The MQTT implementation has seen tons of fixes for small quirks
in how the ESP SDK works. From my own testing, the native API seems to be quite stable - but I'm sure it'll take a bit
of time to find+fix some final bugs.

**How do I migrate from MQTT?**

First, make sure you run at least Home Assistant 0.85.0 (currently a
`beta release <https://www.home-assistant.io/docs/installation/updating/#run-the-beta-version>`__).
Then, go through the migration guide here (removed).

Python 3 Compatibility
----------------------

PlatformIO has finally implemented `python 3 support <https://github.com/platformio/platformio-core/issues/895>`__
after some quick changes, ESPHome is now also compatible with python 3.5+. So with this new release
you can try ESPHome with Python 3 already. Just make sure to install the development version of platformio first:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip3 install -U https://github.com/platformio/platformio-core/archive/develop.zip

I don't particularly like python 2, and in a year's time support for it will officially be ended. So the plan for
ESPHome is to drop python 2 as soon as possible. Once platformio releases version 4.0 (with python 3 support), I
will go through and check everything still works. Maybe ESPHome will support python 2 for 1 or 2 releases after that
but really I want to drop support for python 2 as soon as possible.

Dashboard & Hass.io Addon Updates
---------------------------------

The dashboard and Hass.io addon have seen a lot of ❤️ in this release: The dashboard has seen tons of small
changes to make the user experience better and the Hass.io addon has been completely re-written with the
`Hass.io Community Addon Images <https://github.com/hassio-addons>`__ as the base.

- The dashboard now features a built-in YAML editor.
- Configuration wizard now shows a list of boards directly, so you just have to choose them from a dropdown.
- Hass.io Addon: You can log in using your Home Assistant credentials now.
- And many more changes (colored logs, auto-scroll, node status, update notifications, ...)

Rename: esphome{lib, yaml} -> ESPHome
-------------------------------------

The name esphomelib and esphomeyaml were too technical, and this project has changed a lot since the first
published release (the yaml part didn't even exist back then). So ... the project is being re-branded slightly:

- esphomeyaml -> ESPHome
- esphomelib -> ESPHome Core
- esphomedocs -> ESPHome Docs

As you see, the yaml project is now getting the "fancy" name, because that's by far the best way to use this framework.
As part of this change, using the _core_ framework directly from code (without YAML) is being deprecated, the API docs
have long been inaccurate now and users should really switch over to ESPHome through YAML

Of course that doesn't mean you won't be able to write custom code. In fact, this release also contains lots of
new guides and changes to make creating custom components much easier. The goal is to have a project where users
can use YAML for the boring boilerplate code but can completely customize everything with custom components.

This migration is of course huge - almost every single file in the code+docs base has esphome{lib, yaml} somewhere
in it, so it will take time until the next release for this to be finished.

Breaking Changes
----------------

- Previously, esphomelib would by default only publish every 15th sensor value in order to provide averaged values.
  However, that often confused users and I now decided to remove it **and** set the default update interval of
  all components to ``60s`` instead of the previous ``15s``. You can get back the old behavior by setting

  .. code-block:: yaml

      sensor:
        - platform: ...  # enter platform here
          # other settings
          update_interval: 15s
          filters:
            - sliding_window_moving_average: {}

- The fastled effects have been renamed to ``addressable_`` for the new
  :doc:`Neopixelbus </components/light/neopixelbus>` integration. See the validation error message
  for more info.

Other notable changes:
----------------------

- You can now configured multiple WiFi networks to connect to. The best one will be chosen automatically.
  This is along with a *complete* rewrite of the WiFi component which now interacts directly with the ESP SDK.
  (:ref:`wifi-networks`)
- GPIO Switches have a new option ``restore_mode`` to configure how their values should be restored on boot.
  (:doc:`/components/switch/gpio`)
- Added :ref:`substitutions <config-substitutions>` to reduce repeating across configs.
- Validation error messages are now displayed even better. Now all errors are shown with the exact context
  where the error appeared. Try it, it's so much better. Next step will be to upgrade to a better YAML reader
  to provide better error messages when the YAML syntax is invalid.
- Added a bunch of guides (and helpers) for creating custom components. Also new: ``esphomeyaml.libraries``,
  ``esphomeyaml.includes`` and ``esphomeyaml.platformio_options`` (:doc:`/components/esphome`)
- Saved a lot of flash space on ESP8266 boards. Previously, platformio would allocate about 1/4 of flash for SPIFFS,
  but esphomelib doesn't use that so now you have that as extra storage. Thanks `@brandond <http://github.com/brandond>`
- You can now use Home Assistant to get time in ESPHome, so no more need for SNTP. See :doc:`/components/time/index`.

Release 1.10.1 - January 13
---------------------------

- docs: Fix substitutions example & api intro text :docspr:`117` by :ghuser:`thubot`
- lib: Fix while action not resetting is_running :libpr:`378`
- lib: Fix remote transmitter ESP32 repeat wait :libpr:`376`
- lib: Fix addressable lights :libpr:`375`
- yaml: Fix ESP32 not decoding stacktrace on broken PC :yamlpr:`330`
- docs: Fixed missing link to BME cookbook :docspr:`120` by :ghuser:`Mynasru`
- lib: Fix addressable flicker effect :libpr:`383`
- lib: NeoPixelBus: fix handling of white color component :libpr:`384` by :ghuser:`badbadc0ffee`
- lib: Fix trigger not being optional :libpr:`381`
- docs: Add WiFi fast connect :docspr:`121`
- yaml: Fix AsyncTCP compilation on ESP32 with Arduino breaking change :yamlpr:`334`
- yaml: Fix show logs with MQTT and dashboard :yamlpr:`332`
- lib: Add WiFi fast connect mode :libpr:`385`
- lib: Fix API Server has deep sleep :libpr:`386`
- yaml: Introduce wifi fast connect mode :yamlpr:`333`
- lib: Fix GPIO Switch not handling inverted :libpr:`387`
- lib: Expose NeoPixelBus Controller :libpr:`388`
- yaml: Pin platformio platforms :yamlpr:`335`
- lib: Fix ble tracker compile error :libpr:`390`

All changes
-----------

- docs: CSE7766 Update Interval :docspr:`91`
- docs: add baud_rate; typo on sensor type :docspr:`90` by :ghuser:`drewp`
- docs: Fix docs for LCD display strftime :docspr:`95`
- lib: Make CSE7766 a polling sensor :libpr:`305`
- lib: Supply clang-format file for contributors :libpr:`290`
- yaml: Time SNTP validate server format :yamlpr:`254`
- yaml: Fix GPIO input schema validator :yamlpr:`253`
- lib: Implement custom sensor platform :libpr:`274`
- lib: Only compile code stuff if necessary :libpr:`309`
- yaml: [Huge] Util Refactor, Dashboard Improvements, Hass.io Auth API, Better Validation Errors, Conditions, Custom Platforms, Substitutions :yamlpr:`234`
- docs: Fix copy paste error :docspr:`100` by :ghuser:`oscar-b`
- lib: Fix large JSON payloads being cut off :libpr:`323` by :ghuser:`quazzie`
- docs: Add Wikipedia link to tz database zones list :docspr:`105` by :ghuser:`apeeters`
- docs: Add pins for Shelly 2 :docspr:`103` by :ghuser:`oscar-b`
- lib: Native Esphomelib API :libpr:`322`
- yaml: Add native ESPHome API :yamlpr:`265`
- lib: Add support for MAX31855 sensor :libpr:`310` by :ghuser:`sherbang`
- docs: Documentation for MAX31855 sensor :docspr:`97` by :ghuser:`sherbang`
- lib: Fix typo in Output Switch :libpr:`307`
- lib: Fix PCA9685 with many channels :libpr:`304`
- docs: Fixed typo in Sonoff R2 Cover example :docspr:`112` by :ghuser:`voicevon`
- lib: Dump native API Server config on boot :libpr:`338` by :ghuser:`voicevon`
- lib: Split Automation headers from implementation :libpr:`349`
- lib: Travis update :libpr:`350`
- lib: Fix API Server logs :libpr:`347`
- lib: WiFi Better logging for ESP8266 :libpr:`346`
- lib: API Server Watchdog :libpr:`345`
- lib: GPIO Switch Restore Mode :libpr:`344`
- lib: Fix Remote Receiver Overflow for ESP8266 :libpr:`348`
- yaml: Api fixes :yamlpr:`289`
- yaml: Fix host network :yamlpr:`280`
- yaml: Fix ESP8266 verbose logging :yamlpr:`291`
- yaml: API Server Watchdog :yamlpr:`290`
- lib: Implement Addressable Lights Base :libpr:`243`
- yaml: Disable SPIFFS to save flash space :yamlpr:`288`
- yaml: Fix MQTT message trigger :yamlpr:`282`
- yaml: GPIO Switch Restore Mode :yamlpr:`287`
- yaml: Addressable Lights :yamlpr:`294`
- yaml: Toggle Auto-Update Check With Environment Variable :yamlpr:`292`
- yaml: Make compatible with python 3 :yamlpr:`281`
- docs: Fix copy/paste error in turn_off_action :docspr:`113` by :ghuser:`wutr`
- yaml: GPIO Switch Fix restore_mode validator :yamlpr:`296` by :ghuser:`yottatsa`
- yaml: Fixes for Python 3 Compatibility :yamlpr:`297`
- lib: Stop old template action when new one is started :libpr:`354`
- lib: Add APDS-9960 support :libpr:`286`
- lib: Change default update interval to 60 seconds :libpr:`356`
- lib: ESP32 Ethernet support :libpr:`288`
- lib: Add ULN2003 support :libpr:`301`
- lib: Add clean discovery option to simplify transition to native API :libpr:`357`
- yaml: Add clean MQTT discovery option for native API :yamlpr:`302`
- yaml: Add APDS9960 Support :yamlpr:`300`
- lib: Add neopixelbus component :libpr:`352`
- yaml: Add neopixelbus component :yamlpr:`303`
- yaml: Add support for MAX31855 sensor :yamlpr:`258` by :ghuser:`sherbang`
- yaml: ULN2003 Support :yamlpr:`304`
- yaml: Add ESP32 Ethernet Support :yamlpr:`301`
- docs: total_daily_energy doesn't have pin option :docspr:`114` by :ghuser:`oscar-b`
- docs: Getting started HassIO - USD device discovery :docspr:`110` by :ghuser:`DavidDeSloovere`
- docs: Mismatch in example and text :docspr:`109` by :ghuser:`wellsi`
- docs: BME280 environment cookbook entry :docspr:`107` by :ghuser:`Mynasru`
- docs: Update getting_started_command_line.rst :docspr:`102` by :ghuser:`doskoi`
- docs: Updated the multi click example code block :docspr:`92` by :ghuser:`cooljimy84`
- docs: Add step to setting up devices :docspr:`101` by :ghuser:`magnusoverli`
- yaml: Update beta config :yamlpr:`305`
- yaml: Fix component.update action :yamlpr:`308`
- yaml: OTA don't error when upgrading from no password to password mode :yamlpr:`309`
- yaml: use full space on small devices :yamlpr:`310` by :ghuser:`escoand`
- lib: Fix interval compilation error :libpr:`364`
- yaml: Fix interval trigger :yamlpr:`313`

Past Changelogs
---------------

- :doc:`v1.9.0`
- :doc:`v1.8.0`
- :doc:`v1.7.0`
