HLW8012 Power Sensor
====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up HLW8012 power sensors for the Sonoff Pow R1
    :image: hlw8012.png
    :keywords: HLW8012, Sonoff Pow R1

The ``hlw8012`` sensor platform allows you to use your HLW8012 voltage/current and power sensors
(`datasheet <https://github.com/xoseperez/hlw8012/blob/master/docs/HLW8012.pdf>`__) sensors with
esphomelib. This sensor is commonly found in Sonoff POWs.

This sensor has two data outputs which both encode values using the frequency of a modulated signal: CF and CF1.
CF's frequency is proportional to the (active) power measured and CF1 is proportional to the current/voltage. Using
the SEL pin, one can choose between which mode to use.

esphomelib will continuously cycle the state of the SEL pin to measure current *and* voltage, though both cannot
be measured at the same exact points in time.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: hlw8012
        sel_pin: 5
        cf_pin: 14
        cf1_pin: 13
        current:
          name: "HLW8012 Current"
        voltage:
          name: "HLW8012 Voltage"
        power:
          name: "HLW8012 Power"
        update_interval: 15s

.. note::

    The configuration above should work for Sonoff POWs (R1).

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **sel_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The pin SEL is connected to.
- **cf_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin CF is connected to.
- **cf1_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin CF1 is connected to.
- **current** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the sensor in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>` and :ref:`MQTT Component <config-mqtt-component>`.
- **power** (*Optional*): Use the (active) power value of the sensor in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>` and :ref:`MQTT Component <config-mqtt-component>`.
- **voltage** (*Optional*): Use the voltage value of the sensor in V (RMS).
  All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>` and :ref:`MQTT Component <config-mqtt-component>`.
- **current_resistor** (*Optional*, float): The value of the shunt resistor for current measurement.
  Defaults to the Sonoff POW's value ``0.001 ohm``.
- **voltage_divider** (*Optional*, float): The value of the voltage divider on the board as ``(R_upstream + R_downstream) / R_downstream``.
  Defaults to the Sonoff POW's value ``2351``.
- **change_mode_every** (*Optional*, int): After how many updates to cycle between the current/voltage measurement mode.
  Note that the first value after switching is discarded because it is often inaccurate. Defaults to ``8``.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the sensor. Defaults to ``15s``.
  See :ref:`sensor-default_filter`.

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :doc:`API Reference </api/sensor/hlw8012>`
- `HLW8012 Library <https://github.com/xoseperez/hlw8012>`__ by `Xose Pérez <https://github.com/xoseperez>`__
- `Edit this page on GitHub <https://github.com/OttoWinter/esphomedocs/blob/current/esphomeyaml/components/sensor/hlw8012.rst>`__

.. disqus::
