components/lock/index.rst, before:

Lock Component
================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up generic locks in ESPHome.
    :image: folder-open.svg

The ``lock`` domain includes all platforms that should function like a lock
with lock/unlock actions. 

.. note::

    ESPHome lock components requires Home Assistant 2022.3 or newer

.. _config-lock:

Base Lock Configuration
-------------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

    lock:
      - platform: ...
        name: "Lock Name"

Configuration variables:

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the lock.
- **icon** (*Optional*, icon): Manually set the icon to use for the
  lock in the frontend.
- **internal** (*Optional*, boolean): Mark this component as internal. Internal components will
  not be exposed to the frontend (like Home Assistant). Only specifying an ``id`` without
  a ``name`` will implicitly set this to true.
- **on_lock** (*Optional*, :ref:`Action <config-action>`): An automation to perform
  when the lock is locked. See :ref:`lock-on_lock_unlock_trigger`.
- **on_unlock** (*Optional*, :ref:`Action <config-action>`): An automation to perform
  when the lock is unlocked. See :ref:`lock-on_lock_unlock_trigger`..
- **disabled_by_default** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, then this entity should not be added to any client's frontend,
  (usually Home Assistant) without the user manually enabling it (via the Home Assistant UI).
  Defaults to ``false``.
- **entity_category** (*Optional*, string): The category of the entity.
  See https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/core/entity/#generic-properties
  for a list of available options. Set to ``""`` to remove the default entity category.
- If MQTT enabled, All other options from :ref:`MQTT Component <config-mqtt-component>`.

.. _lock-lock_action:

``lock.lock`` Action
*************************

This action locks a lock with the given ID on when executed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - lock.lock: deadbolt_1

.. _lock-unlock_action:

``lock.unlock`` Action
**************************

This action unlocks a lock with the given ID off when executed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - lock.unlock: deadbolt_1

.. _lock-open_action:

``lock.open`` Action
************************

This action opens (e.g. unlatch) a lock with the given ID off when executed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - lock.open: doorlock_1

.. _lock-is_locked_condition:
.. _lock-is_unlocked_condition:

``lock.is_locked`` / ``lock.is_unlocked`` Condition
***************************************************

This :ref:`Condition <config-condition>` checks if the given lock is LOCKED (or UNLOCKED).

.. code-block:: yaml

    # In some trigger:
    on_...:
      if:
        condition:
          # Same syntax for is_unlocked
          lock.is_locked: my_lock

.. _lock-lambda_calls:

lambda calls
************

From :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`, you can call several methods on all locks to do some
advanced stuff (see the full API Reference for more info).

- ``publish_state()``: Manually cause the lock to publish a new state and store it internally.
  If it's different from the last internal state, it's additionally published to the frontend.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      // Within lambda, make the lock report a specific state
      id(my_lock).publish_state(LOCK_STATE_LOCKED);
      id(my_lock).publish_state(LOCK_STATE_UNLOCKED);

- ``state``: Retrieve the current state of the lock.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      // Within lambda, get the lock state and conditionally do something
      if (id(my_lock).state == LOCK_STATE_LOCKED) {
        // Lock is LOCKED, do something here
      }

- ``unlock()``/``lock()``/``open()``: Manually lock/unlock/open a  lock from code.
  Similar to the ``lock.lock``, ``lock.unlock``, and ``lock.open`` actions,
  but can be used in complex lambda expressions.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      id(my_lock).unlock();
      id(my_lock).lock();
      id(my_lock).open();

.. _lock-on_lock_unlock_trigger:

``lock.on_lock`` / ``lock.on_unlock`` Trigger
****************************************************************

This trigger is activated each time the lock is locked/unlocked. It becomes active
right after the lock component has acknowledged the state (e.g. after it LOCKED/UNLOCKED itself).

.. code-block:: yaml

    lock:
      - platform: template  # or any other platform
        # ...
        on_lock:
        - logger.log: "Door Locked!"
        on_unlock:
        - logger.log: "Door Unlocked!"

See Also
--------

- :apiref:`lock/lock.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1
    :glob:

    *

Commit message:

Add the ability to manually set unique_object_id for unique_id generation, instead of using name

components/lock/index.rst, after:

Lock Component
================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up generic locks in ESPHome.
    :image: folder-open.svg

The ``lock`` domain includes all platforms that should function like a lock
with lock/unlock actions. 

.. note::

    ESPHome lock components requires Home Assistant 2022.3 or newer

.. _config-lock:

Base Lock Configuration
-------------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

    lock:
      - platform: ...
        name: "Lock Name"

Configuration variables:

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the lock.
- **icon** (*Optional*, icon): Manually set the icon to use for the
  lock in the frontend.
- **internal** (*Optional*, boolean): Mark this component as internal. Internal components will
  not be exposed to the frontend (like Home Assistant). Only specifying an ``id`` without
  a ``name`` will implicitly set this to true.
- **on_lock** (*Optional*, :ref:`Action <config-action>`): An automation to perform
  when the lock is locked. See :ref:`lock-on_lock_unlock_trigger`.
- **on_unlock** (*Optional*, :ref:`Action <config-action>`): An automation to perform
  when the lock is unlocked. See :ref:`lock-on_lock_unlock_trigger`..
- **disabled_by_default** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, then this entity should not be added to any client's frontend,
  (usually Home Assistant) without the user manually enabling it (via the Home Assistant UI).
  Defaults to ``false``.
- **entity_category** (*Optional*, string): The category of the entity.
  See https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/core/entity/#generic-properties
  for a list of available options. Set to ``""`` to remove the default entity category.
- **unique_object_id** (*Optional*, string): Used instead of ``name`` for internal ``unique_id`` and ``object_id`` generation.
  If ``name`` has changed and ``unique_object_id`` has not, a new Entity will not be created.
  If ``name`` is localized and consists of non ASCII symbols, set ``unique_object_id`` as transliterated ``name``.
- If MQTT enabled, All other options from :ref:`MQTT Component <config-mqtt-component>`.

.. _lock-lock_action:

``lock.lock`` Action
*************************

This action locks a lock with the given ID on when executed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - lock.lock: deadbolt_1

.. _lock-unlock_action:

``lock.unlock`` Action
**************************

This action unlocks a lock with the given ID off when executed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - lock.unlock: deadbolt_1

.. _lock-open_action:

``lock.open`` Action
************************

This action opens (e.g. unlatch) a lock with the given ID off when executed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - lock.open: doorlock_1

.. _lock-is_locked_condition:
.. _lock-is_unlocked_condition:

``lock.is_locked`` / ``lock.is_unlocked`` Condition
***************************************************

This :ref:`Condition <config-condition>` checks if the given lock is LOCKED (or UNLOCKED).

.. code-block:: yaml

    # In some trigger:
    on_...:
      if:
        condition:
          # Same syntax for is_unlocked
          lock.is_locked: my_lock

.. _lock-lambda_calls:

lambda calls
************

From :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`, you can call several methods on all locks to do some
advanced stuff (see the full API Reference for more info).

- ``publish_state()``: Manually cause the lock to publish a new state and store it internally.
  If it's different from the last internal state, it's additionally published to the frontend.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      // Within lambda, make the lock report a specific state
      id(my_lock).publish_state(LOCK_STATE_LOCKED);
      id(my_lock).publish_state(LOCK_STATE_UNLOCKED);

- ``state``: Retrieve the current state of the lock.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      // Within lambda, get the lock state and conditionally do something
      if (id(my_lock).state == LOCK_STATE_LOCKED) {
        // Lock is LOCKED, do something here
      }

- ``unlock()``/``lock()``/``open()``: Manually lock/unlock/open a  lock from code.
  Similar to the ``lock.lock``, ``lock.unlock``, and ``lock.open`` actions,
  but can be used in complex lambda expressions.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      id(my_lock).unlock();
      id(my_lock).lock();
      id(my_lock).open();

.. _lock-on_lock_unlock_trigger:

``lock.on_lock`` / ``lock.on_unlock`` Trigger
****************************************************************

This trigger is activated each time the lock is locked/unlocked. It becomes active
right after the lock component has acknowledged the state (e.g. after it LOCKED/UNLOCKED itself).

.. code-block:: yaml

    lock:
      - platform: template  # or any other platform
        # ...
        on_lock:
        - logger.log: "Door Locked!"
        on_unlock:
        - logger.log: "Door Unlocked!"

See Also
--------

- :apiref:`lock/lock.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1
    :glob:

    *
