components/light/cwww.rst, before:

Cold White + Warm White Light
=============================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up Cold White + Warm White lights.
    :image: brightness-medium.png

The ``cwww`` light platform creates a cold white + warm white light from 2
:ref:`float output components <output>` (one for each channel). The two channels
can be controlled individually or together.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    light:
      - platform: cwww
        name: "Livingroom Lights"
        cold_white: output_component1
        warm_white: output_component2
        cold_white_color_temperature: 6536 K
        warm_white_color_temperature: 2000 K
        constant_brightness: true

.. _cwww_mixing:

Mixing
------

The two channels of this light can be controlled individually by using the ``cold_white`` and ``warm_white`` options of
the :ref:`light control actions <light-turn_on_action>`.

If the color temperature of both lights is supplied, it is also possible to control the the two channels together by
setting a color temperature, using the ``white`` (interpreted as brightness) and ``color_temperature`` options. This
calculation assumes that both lights have the same illuminance, which might not always be accurate.

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the light.
- **cold_white** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the cold white channel.
- **warm_white** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the warm white channel.
- **cold_white_color_temperature** (*Optional*, float): The color temperature (in `mireds <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mired>`__ or Kelvin)
  of the cold white channel.
- **warm_white_color_temperature** (*Optional*, float): The color temperature (in `mireds <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mired>`__ or Kelvin)
  of the warm white channel.
- **constant_brightness** (*Optional*, boolean): When enabled, this will keep the overall brightness of the cold and warm white channels constant by limiting the combined output to 100% of a single channel. This reduces the possible overall brightness but is necessary for some power supplies that are not able to run both channels at full brightness at once. Defaults to ``false``.
- **effects** (*Optional*, list): A list of :ref:`light effects <light-effects>` to use for this light.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- All other options from :ref:`Light <config-light>`.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/output/index`
- :doc:`/components/light/index`
- :doc:`/components/light/rgb`
- :doc:`/components/light/rgbw`
- :doc:`/components/light/rgbww`
- :doc:`/components/light/rgbct`
- :doc:`/components/light/color_temperature`
- :doc:`/components/power_supply`
- :doc:`/components/output/ledc`
- :doc:`/components/output/esp8266_pwm`
- :doc:`/components/output/pca9685`
- :doc:`/components/output/tlc59208f`
- :apiref:`cwww/cwww_light_output.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add note about cold/warm temperature being required by HA

components/light/cwww.rst, after:

Cold White + Warm White Light
=============================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up Cold White + Warm White lights.
    :image: brightness-medium.png

The ``cwww`` light platform creates a cold white + warm white light from 2
:ref:`float output components <output>` (one for each channel). The two channels
can be controlled individually or together.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    light:
      - platform: cwww
        name: "Livingroom Lights"
        cold_white: output_component1
        warm_white: output_component2
        cold_white_color_temperature: 6536 K
        warm_white_color_temperature: 2000 K
        constant_brightness: true

.. _cwww_mixing:

Mixing
------

The two channels of this light can be controlled individually by using the ``cold_white`` and ``warm_white`` options of
the :ref:`light control actions <light-turn_on_action>`.

If the color temperature of both lights is supplied, it is also possible to control the the two channels together by
setting a color temperature, using the ``white`` (interpreted as brightness) and ``color_temperature`` options. This
calculation assumes that both lights have the same illuminance, which might not always be accurate.

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the light.
- **cold_white** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the cold white channel.
- **warm_white** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the warm white channel.
- **cold_white_color_temperature** (*Optional*, float): The color temperature (in `mireds <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mired>`__ or Kelvin)
  of the cold white channel. Note that this option is required to control the mixing from Home Assistant.
- **warm_white_color_temperature** (*Optional*, float): The color temperature (in `mireds <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mired>`__ or Kelvin)
  of the warm white channel. Note that this option is required to control the mixing from Home Assistant.
- **constant_brightness** (*Optional*, boolean): When enabled, this will keep the overall brightness of the cold and warm white channels constant by limiting the combined output to 100% of a single channel. This reduces the possible overall brightness but is necessary for some power supplies that are not able to run both channels at full brightness at once. Defaults to ``false``.
- **effects** (*Optional*, list): A list of :ref:`light effects <light-effects>` to use for this light.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- All other options from :ref:`Light <config-light>`.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/output/index`
- :doc:`/components/light/index`
- :doc:`/components/light/rgb`
- :doc:`/components/light/rgbw`
- :doc:`/components/light/rgbww`
- :doc:`/components/light/rgbct`
- :doc:`/components/light/color_temperature`
- :doc:`/components/power_supply`
- :doc:`/components/output/ledc`
- :doc:`/components/output/esp8266_pwm`
- :doc:`/components/output/pca9685`
- :doc:`/components/output/tlc59208f`
- :apiref:`cwww/cwww_light_output.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
