components/light/neopixelbus.rst, before:

NeoPixelBus Light
=================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up Neopixel addressable lights.
    :image: color_lens.svg

The ``neopixelbus`` light platform allows you to create RGB lights
in ESPHome for an individually addressable lights like NeoPixel or WS2812.

It is very similar to the :doc:`fastled` platform.
In fact, most addressable lights are supported through both light platforms. The
difference is that they use different libraries: while the fastled platform uses
the `FastLED <https://github.com/FastLED/FastLED>`__ library, this integration uses
the `NeoPixelBus <https://github.com/Makuna/NeoPixelBus/>`__ library internally.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    light:
      - platform: neopixelbus
        type: GRB
        variant: WS2811
        pin: GPIO23
        num_leds: 60
        name: "NeoPixel Light"

Configuration variables:
------------------------

**Base Options:**

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the light.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **num_leds** (**Required**, int): The number of LEDs attached.
- **effects** (*Optional*, list): A list of :ref:`light effects <light-effects>` to use for this light.

**Type Options:**

- **type** (*Optional*, string): The type of light. This is used to specify
  if it is an RGBW or RGB light and in which order the colors are. Defaults to
  ``GRB``. Change this if you have lights with white channel and/or the colors are in the wrong order.
- **variant** (**Required**, string): The chipset of the light.

  The following options are supported:

  - ``800KBPS`` (generic option, recommended for chipsets without explicit support)
  - ``400KBPS``
  - ``WS2811``
  - ``WS2812``
  - ``WS2812X``
  - ``WS2813``
  - ``SK6812``
  - ``TM1814``
  - ``TM1829``
  - ``TM1914``
  - ``APA106``
  - ``LC8812``

  Additionally the following two-wire chipsets (set ``data_pin`` and ``clock_pin``)
  are supported:

  - ``WS2801``
  - ``DotStar``
  - ``LPD6803``
  - ``LPD8806``
  - ``P9813``

- **method** (*Optional*, string): The method used to transmit the data. By default, ESPHome will try to use the best method
  available for this chipset, ESP platform, and the given pin. See :ref:`methods <neopixelbus-methods>` for more information.

- **invert** (*Optional*, boolean): Invert data output, for use with n-type transistors. Defaults to ``no``.

**Pin Options:**

Some chipsets have two data pins to connect, others only have one.
If you have one line, only specify ``pin``, otherwise specify both ``clock_pin`` and ``data_pin``.

- **pin** (**Required**, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin for the data line of the light.
- **clock_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin for the clock line of the light, for two-wire lights.
- **data_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin for the data line of the light, for two-wire lights.

**Advanced Options:**

- All other options from :ref:`Light <config-light>`.

.. warning::

    On ESP8266 it's highly recommended to connect the light strip to pin
    GPIO3 to reduce flickering.

.. _neopixelbus-methods:

Methods
-------

NeoPixelBus supports different methods to transmit the pixel data to the light strip depending
on the chipset, ESP platform and pin.

Each of these has their own advantages/disadvantages regarding stability and speed. By default
ESPHome will choose the best one that is available on the device. However, you can override this
by manually supplying the method option.

.. code-block:: yaml

    light:
      - platform: neopixelbus
        # ...
        method:
          type: esp8266_uart
          bus: 0
          async: false

Use the ``type`` configuration variable to select the method used. The additional configuration
settings vary by method:

- **bit_bang**: The simplest method and available on all platforms. However, it can produce quite a bit of flickering,
  and so is not recommended for use. On ESP8266, supports pins GPIO0-GPIO15, on ESP32 pins GPIO0-GPIO31.

- **esp8266_dma**: The recommended method for ESP8266s. Only available on pin GPIO3.

- **esp8266_uart**: An alternative method for ESP8266s that uses the UART peripheral to send data.
  Available on pin GPIO1 for bus 0, and GPIO2 for bus 1. Additional options:

  - **bus** (*Optional*, int): The UART bus to use. If 0, the logger ``baud_rate`` option must 
    be set to 0 and logs over USB/serial won't work.
  - **async** (*Optional*, boolean): Use an asynchronous transfer. Defaults to ``false``. If enabled,
    the logger must be disabled even if bus 1 is used.

- **esp32_i2s**: The recommended method for ESP32, but not available on the ESP32-S3 or ESP32-C3.
  Available on all output pins. Additional options:

  - **bus** (*Optional*): The I2S bus to use. The ESP32 has bus 0 or 1 available, but the ESP32-S2 only bus 0.
    One of ``0``, ``1``, ``dynamic``.

- **esp32_rmt**: An alternative method for ESP32 that uses the RMT peripheral to send data.
  Available on all output pins. Additional options:

  - **channel** (*Optional*): The RMT channel to use. The ESP32 has channels 0-7, ESP32-S2 0-3, ESP32-S3 0-3, and ESP32-C3 0-1.
    Defaults to 6 on ESP32, and 1 on other ESP32 variants.

The following method is available only for two-wire chips (specify ``data_pin`` and ``clock_pin``):

- **spi**: Uses the hardware SPI interface to transmit the data. Available on both ESP platforms.
  Additional options:

  - **bus** (*Optional*, string): On ESP32s the SPI bus to be used can be selected. One of ``vspi`` and ``hspi``.
  - **speed** (*Optional*, int): The frequency to send data with. Defaults to ``10MHz``. One of
    ``40MHz``, ``20MHz``, ``10MHz``, ``5MHz``, ``2MHz``, ``1MHz``, ``500KHz``.
  
  On ESP8266 only GPIO13 can be used for ``data_pin`` and only GPIO14 can be used for ``clock_pin``.

The ``method`` key also accepts a short-hand syntax consisting of a single value for historic reasons. Usage of
this method is no longer recommended, but documented here for reference purposes. Possible values were:

- ``ESP8266_DMA`` (for ``esp8266_dma``)
- ``ESP8266_UART0`` (for ``esp8266_uart`` on bus 0)
- ``ESP8266_UART1`` (for ``esp8266_uart`` on bus 1)
- ``ESP8266_ASYNC_UART0`` (for ``esp8266_uart`` on bus 0 with async enabled)
- ``ESP8266_ASYNC_UART1`` (for ``esp8266_uart`` on bus 1 with async enabled)
- ``ESP32_I2S_0`` (for ``esp32_i2s`` on bus 0)
- ``ESP32_I2S_1`` (for ``esp32_i2s`` on bus 1)
- ``BIT_BANG`` (for ``bit_bang``)

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/light/index`
- :doc:`/components/light/fastled`
- :doc:`/components/power_supply`
- :apiref:`neopixelbus/neopixelbus_light.h`
- `NeoPixelBus library <https://github.com/Makuna/NeoPixelBus/wiki/ESP8266-NeoMethods>`__
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add warning addressable lights on esp-idf

components/light/neopixelbus.rst, after:

NeoPixelBus Light
=================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up Neopixel addressable lights.
    :image: color_lens.svg

.. warning::

    NeoPixelBus does **not** work with ESP-IDF.

    For addressable lights, you can use :doc:`esp32_rmt_led_strip`.

The ``neopixelbus`` light platform allows you to create RGB lights
in ESPHome for an individually addressable lights like NeoPixel or WS2812.

It is very similar to the :doc:`fastled` platform.
In fact, most addressable lights are supported through both light platforms. The
difference is that they use different libraries: while the fastled platform uses
the `FastLED <https://github.com/FastLED/FastLED>`__ library, this integration uses
the `NeoPixelBus <https://github.com/Makuna/NeoPixelBus/>`__ library internally.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    light:
      - platform: neopixelbus
        type: GRB
        variant: WS2811
        pin: GPIO23
        num_leds: 60
        name: "NeoPixel Light"

Configuration variables:
------------------------

**Base Options:**

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the light.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **num_leds** (**Required**, int): The number of LEDs attached.
- **effects** (*Optional*, list): A list of :ref:`light effects <light-effects>` to use for this light.

**Type Options:**

- **type** (*Optional*, string): The type of light. This is used to specify
  if it is an RGBW or RGB light and in which order the colors are. Defaults to
  ``GRB``. Change this if you have lights with white channel and/or the colors are in the wrong order.
- **variant** (**Required**, string): The chipset of the light.

  The following options are supported:

  - ``800KBPS`` (generic option, recommended for chipsets without explicit support)
  - ``400KBPS``
  - ``WS2811``
  - ``WS2812``
  - ``WS2812X``
  - ``WS2813``
  - ``SK6812``
  - ``TM1814``
  - ``TM1829``
  - ``TM1914``
  - ``APA106``
  - ``LC8812``

  Additionally the following two-wire chipsets (set ``data_pin`` and ``clock_pin``)
  are supported:

  - ``WS2801``
  - ``DotStar``
  - ``LPD6803``
  - ``LPD8806``
  - ``P9813``

- **method** (*Optional*, string): The method used to transmit the data. By default, ESPHome will try to use the best method
  available for this chipset, ESP platform, and the given pin. See :ref:`methods <neopixelbus-methods>` for more information.

- **invert** (*Optional*, boolean): Invert data output, for use with n-type transistors. Defaults to ``no``.

**Pin Options:**

Some chipsets have two data pins to connect, others only have one.
If you have one line, only specify ``pin``, otherwise specify both ``clock_pin`` and ``data_pin``.

- **pin** (**Required**, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin for the data line of the light.
- **clock_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin for the clock line of the light, for two-wire lights.
- **data_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin for the data line of the light, for two-wire lights.

**Advanced Options:**

- All other options from :ref:`Light <config-light>`.

.. warning::

    On ESP8266 it's highly recommended to connect the light strip to pin
    GPIO3 to reduce flickering.

.. _neopixelbus-methods:

Methods
-------

NeoPixelBus supports different methods to transmit the pixel data to the light strip depending
on the chipset, ESP platform and pin.

Each of these has their own advantages/disadvantages regarding stability and speed. By default
ESPHome will choose the best one that is available on the device. However, you can override this
by manually supplying the method option.

.. code-block:: yaml

    light:
      - platform: neopixelbus
        # ...
        method:
          type: esp8266_uart
          bus: 0
          async: false

Use the ``type`` configuration variable to select the method used. The additional configuration
settings vary by method:

- **bit_bang**: The simplest method and available on all platforms. However, it can produce quite a bit of flickering,
  and so is not recommended for use. On ESP8266, supports pins GPIO0-GPIO15, on ESP32 pins GPIO0-GPIO31.

- **esp8266_dma**: The recommended method for ESP8266s. Only available on pin GPIO3.

- **esp8266_uart**: An alternative method for ESP8266s that uses the UART peripheral to send data.
  Available on pin GPIO1 for bus 0, and GPIO2 for bus 1. Additional options:

  - **bus** (*Optional*, int): The UART bus to use. If 0, the logger ``baud_rate`` option must 
    be set to 0 and logs over USB/serial won't work.
  - **async** (*Optional*, boolean): Use an asynchronous transfer. Defaults to ``false``. If enabled,
    the logger must be disabled even if bus 1 is used.

- **esp32_i2s**: The recommended method for ESP32, but not available on the ESP32-S3 or ESP32-C3.
  Available on all output pins. Additional options:

  - **bus** (*Optional*): The I2S bus to use. The ESP32 has bus 0 or 1 available, but the ESP32-S2 only bus 0.
    One of ``0``, ``1``, ``dynamic``.

- **esp32_rmt**: An alternative method for ESP32 that uses the RMT peripheral to send data.
  Available on all output pins. Additional options:

  - **channel** (*Optional*): The RMT channel to use. The ESP32 has channels 0-7, ESP32-S2 0-3, ESP32-S3 0-3, and ESP32-C3 0-1.
    Defaults to 6 on ESP32, and 1 on other ESP32 variants.

The following method is available only for two-wire chips (specify ``data_pin`` and ``clock_pin``):

- **spi**: Uses the hardware SPI interface to transmit the data. Available on both ESP platforms.
  Additional options:

  - **bus** (*Optional*, string): On ESP32s the SPI bus to be used can be selected. One of ``vspi`` and ``hspi``.
  - **speed** (*Optional*, int): The frequency to send data with. Defaults to ``10MHz``. One of
    ``40MHz``, ``20MHz``, ``10MHz``, ``5MHz``, ``2MHz``, ``1MHz``, ``500KHz``.
  
  On ESP8266 only GPIO13 can be used for ``data_pin`` and only GPIO14 can be used for ``clock_pin``.

The ``method`` key also accepts a short-hand syntax consisting of a single value for historic reasons. Usage of
this method is no longer recommended, but documented here for reference purposes. Possible values were:

- ``ESP8266_DMA`` (for ``esp8266_dma``)
- ``ESP8266_UART0`` (for ``esp8266_uart`` on bus 0)
- ``ESP8266_UART1`` (for ``esp8266_uart`` on bus 1)
- ``ESP8266_ASYNC_UART0`` (for ``esp8266_uart`` on bus 0 with async enabled)
- ``ESP8266_ASYNC_UART1`` (for ``esp8266_uart`` on bus 1 with async enabled)
- ``ESP32_I2S_0`` (for ``esp32_i2s`` on bus 0)
- ``ESP32_I2S_1`` (for ``esp32_i2s`` on bus 1)
- ``BIT_BANG`` (for ``bit_bang``)

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/light/index`
- :doc:`/components/light/fastled`
- :doc:`/components/power_supply`
- :apiref:`neopixelbus/neopixelbus_light.h`
- `NeoPixelBus library <https://github.com/Makuna/NeoPixelBus/wiki/ESP8266-NeoMethods>`__
- :ghedit:`Edit`
