components/light/rgbww.rst, before:

RGBWW Light
===========

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up RGBWW lights.
    :image: rgbw.png

The ``rgbww`` light platform creates an RGBWW (cold white + warm white)
light from 5 :ref:`float output components <output>` (one for each channel). The cold and warm
white channels can be controlled individually or together, see :ref:`cwww_mixing` for more information.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    light:
      - platform: rgbww
        name: "Livingroom Lights"
        red: output_component1
        green: output_component2
        blue: output_component3
        cold_white: output_component4
        warm_white: output_component5
        cold_white_color_temperature: 6536 K
        warm_white_color_temperature: 2000 K

Color Correction
----------------

It is often favourable to calibrate/correct the color produced by an LED strip light as the
perceived intensity of different colors will generally vary. This can be done by using
:ref:`max_power <config-output>` on individual output channels:


.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    light:
      - platform: rgbw
        name: "Livingroom Lights"
        red: output_component1
        green: output_component2
        blue: output_component3
        white: output_component4

    # Example output entry
    output:
      - platform: esp8266_pwm
        id: output_component1
        pin: D1
        max_power: 80%

Color Interlock
---------------

With some LED bulbs, it is not possible to enable the RGB leds at the same time as the white leds, or setting
the RGB channels to maximum whilst wanting a white light will have an undesired hue effect. For these cases a
configuration variable is available that prevents the RGB leds and white leds from being turned on at the same
time: ``color_interlock``.

Setting this option to ``true`` will result in the light having two color modes available, ``RGB`` and ``COLD_WARM_WHITE``.
When the ``RGB`` color mode is active, the white leds are turned off, and when the ``COLD_WARM_WHITE`` color mode is active,
the RGB leds are turned off. Switching between these modes can be done from the Home Assistant interface, or by using
the ``color_mode`` option of the :ref:`light control actions <light-turn_on_action>`.


Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the light.
- **red** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the red channel.
- **green** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the green channel.
- **blue** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the blue channel.
- **cold_white** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the cold
  white channel.
- **warm_white** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the warm
  white channel.
- **cold_white_color_temperature** (*Optional*, float): The color temperature (in
  `mireds <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mired>`__ or Kelvin) of the cold white channel.
- **warm_white_color_temperature** (*Optional*, float): The color temperature (in
  `mireds <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mired>`__ or Kelvin) of the warm white channel.
- **constant_brightness** (*Optional*, boolean): When enabled, this will keep the overall brightness of the
  cold and warm white channels constant by limiting the combined output to 100% of a single channel. This
  reduces the possible overall brightness but is necessary for some power supplies that are not able to run
  both channels at full brightness at once. Defaults to ``false``.
- **color_interlock** (*Optional*, boolean): When enabled, this will prevent white leds being on at the same
  time as RGB leds. See :ref:`rgbw_color_interlock` for more information. Defaults to ``false``.
- **effects** (*Optional*, list): A list of :ref:`light effects <light-effects>` to use for this light.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- All other options from :ref:`Light <config-light>`.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/output/index`
- :doc:`/components/light/index`
- :doc:`/components/light/rgb`
- :doc:`/components/light/rgbw`
- :doc:`/components/power_supply`
- :doc:`/components/output/ledc`
- :doc:`/components/output/esp8266_pwm`
- :doc:`/components/output/pca9685`
- :doc:`/components/output/tlc59208f`
- :doc:`/components/output/my9231`
- :doc:`/components/output/sm16716`
- :apiref:`rgbww/rgbww_light_output.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add note about cold/warm temperature being required by HA

components/light/rgbww.rst, after:

RGBWW Light
===========

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up RGBWW lights.
    :image: rgbw.png

The ``rgbww`` light platform creates an RGBWW (cold white + warm white)
light from 5 :ref:`float output components <output>` (one for each channel). The cold and warm
white channels can be controlled individually or together, see :ref:`cwww_mixing` for more information.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    light:
      - platform: rgbww
        name: "Livingroom Lights"
        red: output_component1
        green: output_component2
        blue: output_component3
        cold_white: output_component4
        warm_white: output_component5
        cold_white_color_temperature: 6536 K
        warm_white_color_temperature: 2000 K

Color Correction
----------------

It is often favourable to calibrate/correct the color produced by an LED strip light as the
perceived intensity of different colors will generally vary. This can be done by using
:ref:`max_power <config-output>` on individual output channels:


.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    light:
      - platform: rgbw
        name: "Livingroom Lights"
        red: output_component1
        green: output_component2
        blue: output_component3
        white: output_component4

    # Example output entry
    output:
      - platform: esp8266_pwm
        id: output_component1
        pin: D1
        max_power: 80%

Color Interlock
---------------

With some LED bulbs, it is not possible to enable the RGB leds at the same time as the white leds, or setting
the RGB channels to maximum whilst wanting a white light will have an undesired hue effect. For these cases a
configuration variable is available that prevents the RGB leds and white leds from being turned on at the same
time: ``color_interlock``.

Setting this option to ``true`` will result in the light having two color modes available, ``RGB`` and ``COLD_WARM_WHITE``.
When the ``RGB`` color mode is active, the white leds are turned off, and when the ``COLD_WARM_WHITE`` color mode is active,
the RGB leds are turned off. Switching between these modes can be done from the Home Assistant interface, or by using
the ``color_mode`` option of the :ref:`light control actions <light-turn_on_action>`.


Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the light.
- **red** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the red channel.
- **green** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the green channel.
- **blue** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the blue channel.
- **cold_white** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the cold
  white channel.
- **warm_white** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the float :ref:`output` to use for the warm
  white channel.
- **cold_white_color_temperature** (*Optional*, float): The color temperature (in
  `mireds <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mired>`__ or Kelvin) of the cold white channel. Note that when the color interlock
  is enabled, this option is required to control the light from Home Assistant.
- **warm_white_color_temperature** (*Optional*, float): The color temperature (in
  `mireds <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mired>`__ or Kelvin) of the warm white channel. Note that when the color interlock
  is enabled, this option is required to control the light from Home Assistant.
- **constant_brightness** (*Optional*, boolean): When enabled, this will keep the overall brightness of the
  cold and warm white channels constant by limiting the combined output to 100% of a single channel. This
  reduces the possible overall brightness but is necessary for some power supplies that are not able to run
  both channels at full brightness at once. Defaults to ``false``.
- **color_interlock** (*Optional*, boolean): When enabled, this will prevent white leds being on at the same
  time as RGB leds. See :ref:`rgbw_color_interlock` for more information. Defaults to ``false``.
- **effects** (*Optional*, list): A list of :ref:`light effects <light-effects>` to use for this light.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- All other options from :ref:`Light <config-light>`.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/output/index`
- :doc:`/components/light/index`
- :doc:`/components/light/rgb`
- :doc:`/components/light/rgbw`
- :doc:`/components/power_supply`
- :doc:`/components/output/ledc`
- :doc:`/components/output/esp8266_pwm`
- :doc:`/components/output/pca9685`
- :doc:`/components/output/tlc59208f`
- :doc:`/components/output/my9231`
- :doc:`/components/output/sm16716`
- :apiref:`rgbww/rgbww_light_output.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
