components/light/shelly_dimmer.rst, before:

Shelly Dimmer
=============

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up a Shelly Dimmer 2.
    :image: shellydimmer2.jpg
    
The ``shelly_dimmer`` component adds support for the dimming and power-metering functionality that can be found the `Shelly Dimmer 2 <https://shelly.cloud/knowledge-base/devices/shelly-dimmer-2/>`_. The interaction with mains is done via an STM32 microcontroller that is flashed with an `open source firmware <https://github.com/jamesturton/shelly-dimmer-stm32>`_.
A detailed analysis of the Shelly Dimmer 2 hardware is given `here <https://github.com/arendst/Tasmota/issues/6914>`_.

.. figure:: ../../images/shellydimmer2.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 40.0%


An example of a configuration of this component:

.. code-block:: yaml

    logger:
        baud_rate: 0

    uart:
        tx_pin: 1
        rx_pin: 3
        baud_rate: 115200
    sensor:

    light:
        - platform: shelly_dimmer
          name: Shelly Dimmer 2 Light
          id: thislight
          power:
            name: Shelly Dimmer 2 Light Power
          voltage:
            name: Shelly Dimmer 2 Light Voltage
          current:
            name: Shelly Dimmer 2 Light Current
          max_brightness: 500


Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **uart_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID of the UART hub. 

.. note::

    Currently, only the first hardware UART of the ESP is supported, which has to be configured like this:  

    .. code-block:: yaml

        uart:
            tx_pin: 1
            rx_pin: 3
            baud_rate: 115200


- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the light.
- **leading_edge** (**Optional**, boolean): `Dimming mode <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dimmer#Solid-state_dimmer>`_: "true" means leading edge, "false" (default) is trailing edge.
- **min_brightness** (**Optional**, int): Minimum brightness value on a scale from 0..1000, the default is 0.
- **max_brightness** (**Optional**, int): Maximum brightness value on a scale from 0..1000, the default is 1000.
- **warmup_brightness** (**Optional**, int): Brightness threshold below which the dimmer switches on later in mains current cycle. `This might help with dimming LEDs <https://github.com/jamesturton/shelly-dimmer-stm32/pull/23>`_. The value is from 0..1000 with an default of 0.
- **nrst_pin** (**Optional**, :ref:`config-pin`): Pin connected with "NRST" of STM32. The  default is "GPIO5".
- **boot0_pin** (**Optional**, :ref:`config-pin`): Pin connected with "BOOT0" of STM32. The  default is "GPIO4".
- **current** (**Optional**): Sensor of the current in Amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **voltage** (**Optional**): Sensor of the voltage in Volts. Only accurate if neutral is connected. All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power** (**Optional**): Sensor of the active power in Watts. Only accurate if neutral is connected. All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **firmware**  (**Optional**, string) Version string of the `firmware <https://github.com/jamesturton/shelly-dimmer-stm32>`_ that will be flashed on the microcontroller. The default is "51.5".
- All other options from :ref:`Light <config-light>`.


See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/light/index`
- :apiref:`shelly_dimmer/light/shelly_dimmer.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Shelly Dimmer: update firmware section

components/light/shelly_dimmer.rst, after:

Shelly Dimmer
=============

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up a Shelly Dimmer 2.
    :image: shellydimmer2.jpg
    
The ``shelly_dimmer`` component adds support for the dimming and power-metering functionality that can be found the `Shelly Dimmer 2 <https://shelly.cloud/knowledge-base/devices/shelly-dimmer-2/>`_. The interaction with mains is done via an STM32 microcontroller that is flashed with an `open source firmware <https://github.com/jamesturton/shelly-dimmer-stm32>`_.
A detailed analysis of the Shelly Dimmer 2 hardware is given `here <https://github.com/arendst/Tasmota/issues/6914>`_.

.. figure:: ../../images/shellydimmer2.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 40.0%


An example of a configuration of this component:

.. code-block:: yaml

    logger:
        baud_rate: 0

    uart:
        tx_pin: 1
        rx_pin: 3
        baud_rate: 115200
    sensor:

    light:
        - platform: shelly_dimmer
          name: Shelly Dimmer 2 Light
          id: thislight
          power:
            name: Shelly Dimmer 2 Light Power
          voltage:
            name: Shelly Dimmer 2 Light Voltage
          current:
            name: Shelly Dimmer 2 Light Current
          max_brightness: 500
          firmware:
            version: "51.6"
            update: true


Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **uart_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID of the UART hub. 

.. note::

    Currently, only the first hardware UART of the ESP is supported, which has to be configured like this:  

    .. code-block:: yaml

        uart:
            tx_pin: 1
            rx_pin: 3
            baud_rate: 115200


- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the light.
- **leading_edge** (**Optional**, boolean): `Dimming mode <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dimmer#Solid-state_dimmer>`_: "true" means leading edge, "false" (default) is trailing edge.
- **min_brightness** (**Optional**, int): Minimum brightness value on a scale from 0..1000, the default is 0.
- **max_brightness** (**Optional**, int): Maximum brightness value on a scale from 0..1000, the default is 1000.
- **warmup_brightness** (**Optional**, int): Brightness threshold below which the dimmer switches on later in mains current cycle. `This might help with dimming LEDs <https://github.com/jamesturton/shelly-dimmer-stm32/pull/23>`_. The value is from 0..1000 with an default of 0.
- **nrst_pin** (**Optional**, :ref:`config-pin`): Pin connected with "NRST" of STM32. The  default is "GPIO5".
- **boot0_pin** (**Optional**, :ref:`config-pin`): Pin connected with "BOOT0" of STM32. The  default is "GPIO4".
- **current** (**Optional**): Sensor of the current in Amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **voltage** (**Optional**): Sensor of the voltage in Volts. Only accurate if neutral is connected. All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power** (**Optional**): Sensor of the active power in Watts. Only accurate if neutral is connected. All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **firmware**  (**Optional**):
    - **version**  (**Optional**): Version string of the `firmware <https://github.com/jamesturton/shelly-dimmer-stm32>`_ that will be expected on the microcontroller. The default is "51.6", another known-good firmware is "51.5".
    - **url** (**Optional**): An URL to download the firmware from. Defaults to github for known firmware versions.
    - **sha256** (**Optional**):  A hash to compare the downloaded firmware against. Defaults a proper hash of known firmware versions.
    - **update** (**Optional**):  Should the firmware of the STM be updated if necessary? The default is false.

.. note::

    When flashing Shelly Dimmer with esphome for the first time, flashing the STM firmware is necessary too for the dimmer to work:

    .. code-block:: yaml
          firmware:
            version: "51.6" #<-- set version here
            update: true


- All other options from :ref:`Light <config-light>`.


See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/light/index`
- :apiref:`shelly_dimmer/light/shelly_dimmer.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
