components/binary_sensor/ble_presence.rst, before:

ESP32 Bluetooth Low Energy Device
=================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up BLE binary sensors for the ESP32.
    :image: bluetooth.svg

The ``ble_presence`` binary sensor platform lets you track the presence of a
Bluetooth Low Energy device.

.. figure:: images/esp32_ble-ui.png
    :align: center
    :width: 80.0%

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    esp32_ble_tracker:

    binary_sensor:
      # Presence based on MAC address
      - platform: ble_presence
        mac_address: AC:37:43:77:5F:4C
        name: "ESP32 BLE Tracker Google Home Mini"
        min_rssi: -80dB
      # Presence based on BLE Service UUID
      - platform: ble_presence
        service_uuid: '11aa'
        name: "ESP32 BLE Tracker Test Service 16 bit"
      # Presence based on iBeacon UUID
      - platform: ble_presence
        ibeacon_uuid: '68586f1e-89c2-11eb-8dcd-0242ac130003'
        name: "ESP32 BLE Tracker Test Service iBeacon"

.. note::

    Service UUID can be 16 bit long, as in the example, but it can also be 32 bit long
    like ``1122aaff``, or 128 bit long like ``11223344-5566-7788-99aa-bbccddeeff00``.



Configuration variables:
------------------------

-  **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the binary sensor.
-  **mac_address** (*Optional*, MAC Address): The MAC address to track for this
   binary sensor. Note that exactly one of ``mac_address``, ``service_uuid`` or ``ibeacon_uuid``
   must be present.
-  **service_uuid** (*Optional*, string): 16 bit, 32 bit, or 128 bit BLE Service UUID
   which can be tracked if the device randomizes the MAC address. Note that exactly one of
   ``mac_address``, ``service_uuid`` or ``ibeacon_uuid`` must be present.
-  **ibeacon_uuid** (*Optional*, string): The `universally unique identifier <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier>`__
   to identify the beacon that needs to be tracked. Note that exactly one of ``mac_address``,
   ``service_uuid`` or ``ibeacon_uuid`` must be present.
-  **ibeacon_major** (*Optional*, int): The iBeacon major identifier of the beacon that needs
   to be tracked. Usually used to group beacons, for example for grouping all beacons in the
   same building.
-  **ibeacon_minor** (*Optional*, int): The iBeacon minor identifier of the beacon that needs
   to be tracked. Usually used to identify beacons within an iBeacon group.
-  **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify
   the ID used for code generation.
-  **min_rssi** (*Optional*, int): at which minimum RSSI level would the component report the device be precent
-  All other options from :ref:`Binary Sensor <config-binary_sensor>`.

.. _esp32_ble_tracker-setting_up_devices:

Setting Up Devices
------------------

To set up binary sensors for specific BLE beacons you first have to know which MAC address
to track. Most devices show this screen in some setting menu. If you don't know the MAC address,
however, you can use the ``esp32_ble_tracker`` hub without any binary sensors attached and read through
the logs to see discovered Bluetooth Low Energy devices.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry for finding MAC addresses
    esp32_ble_tracker:

Using the configuration above, first you should see a ``Starting scan...`` debug message at
boot-up. Then, when a BLE device is discovered, you should see messages like
``Found device AC:37:43:77:5F:4C`` together with some information about their
address type and advertised name. If you don't see these messages, your device is unfortunately
currently not supported.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry for finding
    # Service UUIDs and iBeacon UUIDs and identifiers
    esp32_ble_tracker:

    logger:
      level: VERY_VERBOSE

You can increase the :ref:`log level <logger-log_levels>` to ``VERY_VERBOSE`` to review detailed
data for each discovered BLE device. This will make ESPHome print Service UUIDs, iBeacon UUIDs,
iBeacon major and minor identifiers, BLE manufacturer data, RSSI and other data useful for
debugging purposes. Note that this is useful only during set-up and a less verbose log level
should be specified afterwards.

Please note that devices that show a ``RANDOM`` address type in the logs cannot be used for
MAC address based tracking, since their MAC-address periodically changes. Instead you can:

-  Create a BLE beacon, set a unique 16 bit, 32 bit or 128 bit Service UUID and track your device
   based on that. Make sure you don't pick a `GATT Service UUID
   <https://www.bluetooth.com/specifications/gatt/services/>`__, otherwise generic services
   might give you incorrect tracking results.

-  Create an iBeacon and track it based on its iBeacon UUID. You can also optionally specify
   major and minor numbers to match if additional filtering is required. ESPHome offers this
   functionality via the :doc:`ESP32 Bluetooth Low Energy Beacon </components/esp32_ble_beacon>`
   component. Several iOS and Android applications, including the open source Home Assistant
   mobile application also provide means to create iBeacons.


See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/esp32_ble_tracker`
- :doc:`/components/esp32_ble_beacon`
- :doc:`/components/binary_sensor/index`
- :apiref:`ble_presence/ble_presence.h`
- `ESP32 BLE for Arduino <https://github.com/nkolban/ESP32_BLE_Arduino>`__ by `Neil Kolban <https://github.com/nkolban>`__.
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add resource warnings to BLE, voice and audio component docs

components/binary_sensor/ble_presence.rst, after:

ESP32 Bluetooth Low Energy Device
=================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up BLE binary sensors for the ESP32.
    :image: bluetooth.svg

The ``ble_presence`` binary sensor platform lets you track the presence of a Bluetooth Low Energy device.

.. warning::

    The BLE software stack on the ESP32 consumes a significant amount of RAM on the device.
    
    **Crashes are likely to occur** if you include too many additional components in your device's
    configuration. Memory-intensive components such as :doc:`/components/voice_assistant` and other
    audio components are most likely to cause issues.

.. figure:: images/esp32_ble-ui.png
    :align: center
    :width: 80.0%

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    esp32_ble_tracker:

    binary_sensor:
      # Presence based on MAC address
      - platform: ble_presence
        mac_address: AC:37:43:77:5F:4C
        name: "ESP32 BLE Tracker Google Home Mini"
        min_rssi: -80dB
      # Presence based on BLE Service UUID
      - platform: ble_presence
        service_uuid: '11aa'
        name: "ESP32 BLE Tracker Test Service 16 bit"
      # Presence based on iBeacon UUID
      - platform: ble_presence
        ibeacon_uuid: '68586f1e-89c2-11eb-8dcd-0242ac130003'
        name: "ESP32 BLE Tracker Test Service iBeacon"

.. note::

    Service UUID can be 16 bit long, as in the example, but it can also be 32 bit long
    like ``1122aaff``, or 128 bit long like ``11223344-5566-7788-99aa-bbccddeeff00``.



Configuration variables:
------------------------

-  **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the binary sensor.
-  **mac_address** (*Optional*, MAC Address): The MAC address to track for this
   binary sensor. Note that exactly one of ``mac_address``, ``service_uuid`` or ``ibeacon_uuid``
   must be present.
-  **service_uuid** (*Optional*, string): 16 bit, 32 bit, or 128 bit BLE Service UUID
   which can be tracked if the device randomizes the MAC address. Note that exactly one of
   ``mac_address``, ``service_uuid`` or ``ibeacon_uuid`` must be present.
-  **ibeacon_uuid** (*Optional*, string): The `universally unique identifier <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier>`__
   to identify the beacon that needs to be tracked. Note that exactly one of ``mac_address``,
   ``service_uuid`` or ``ibeacon_uuid`` must be present.
-  **ibeacon_major** (*Optional*, int): The iBeacon major identifier of the beacon that needs
   to be tracked. Usually used to group beacons, for example for grouping all beacons in the
   same building.
-  **ibeacon_minor** (*Optional*, int): The iBeacon minor identifier of the beacon that needs
   to be tracked. Usually used to identify beacons within an iBeacon group.
-  **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify
   the ID used for code generation.
-  **min_rssi** (*Optional*, int): at which minimum RSSI level would the component report the device be precent
-  All other options from :ref:`Binary Sensor <config-binary_sensor>`.

.. _esp32_ble_tracker-setting_up_devices:

Setting Up Devices
------------------

To set up binary sensors for specific BLE beacons you first have to know which MAC address
to track. Most devices show this screen in some setting menu. If you don't know the MAC address,
however, you can use the ``esp32_ble_tracker`` hub without any binary sensors attached and read through
the logs to see discovered Bluetooth Low Energy devices.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry for finding MAC addresses
    esp32_ble_tracker:

Using the configuration above, first you should see a ``Starting scan...`` debug message at
boot-up. Then, when a BLE device is discovered, you should see messages like
``Found device AC:37:43:77:5F:4C`` together with some information about their
address type and advertised name. If you don't see these messages, your device is unfortunately
currently not supported.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry for finding
    # Service UUIDs and iBeacon UUIDs and identifiers
    esp32_ble_tracker:

    logger:
      level: VERY_VERBOSE

You can increase the :ref:`log level <logger-log_levels>` to ``VERY_VERBOSE`` to review detailed
data for each discovered BLE device. This will make ESPHome print Service UUIDs, iBeacon UUIDs,
iBeacon major and minor identifiers, BLE manufacturer data, RSSI and other data useful for
debugging purposes. Note that this is useful only during set-up and a less verbose log level
should be specified afterwards.

Please note that devices that show a ``RANDOM`` address type in the logs cannot be used for
MAC address based tracking, since their MAC-address periodically changes. Instead you can:

-  Create a BLE beacon, set a unique 16 bit, 32 bit or 128 bit Service UUID and track your device
   based on that. Make sure you don't pick a `GATT Service UUID
   <https://www.bluetooth.com/specifications/gatt/services/>`__, otherwise generic services
   might give you incorrect tracking results.

-  Create an iBeacon and track it based on its iBeacon UUID. You can also optionally specify
   major and minor numbers to match if additional filtering is required. ESPHome offers this
   functionality via the :doc:`ESP32 Bluetooth Low Energy Beacon </components/esp32_ble_beacon>`
   component. Several iOS and Android applications, including the open source Home Assistant
   mobile application also provide means to create iBeacons.


See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/esp32_ble_tracker`
- :doc:`/components/esp32_ble_beacon`
- :doc:`/components/binary_sensor/index`
- :apiref:`ble_presence/ble_presence.h`
- `ESP32 BLE for Arduino <https://github.com/nkolban/ESP32_BLE_Arduino>`__ by `Neil Kolban <https://github.com/nkolban>`__.
- :ghedit:`Edit`
