EKTF2232 Touch Screen Controller
================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up EKTF2232 touch screen controller with ESPHome
    :image: ektf2232.svg
    :keywords: EKTF2232

.. _ektf2232-component:

Component/Hub
-------------

The ``ektf2232`` component allows using the touch screen controller
found in the :doc:`Inkplate 6 Plus </components/display/inkplate6>` with ESPHome.
The :ref:`I²C <i2c>` is required to be set up in your configuration for this sensor to work.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    ektf2232:
      interrupt_pin: GPIO36
      rts_pin: GPIO16

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: ektf2232
        id: touch_key0
        x_min: 80
        x_max: 160
        y_min: 106
        y_max: 212


Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Set the ID of this sensor.

- **rts_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The reset pin of the controller.

- **interupt_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The touch detection pin.

- **display_width** (*Optional*, int): The dimension of the display in the horizontal
  direction. Defaults to ``1024`` to match the Inkplate 6 Plus.

- **display_height** (*Optional*, int): The dimension of the display in the vertical
  direction. Defaults to ``758`` to match the Inkplate 6 Plus.

- **on_press** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the touch screen is pressed. See :ref:`ektf2232-on_press`.

.. _ektf2232-on_press:

``on_press`` Trigger
--------------------

This automation will be triggered when the EKTF2232 touch screen detects a touch.

This trigger provides one arguments of type :apistruct:`ektf2232::TouchPoint` which has two integer members: ``x`` and ``y`` which
represent the position of the touch calibrated to the display width and heigh conffig options given.

Binary Sensor
-------------

The ``ektf2232`` binary sensor allows you to setup areas on the touch screen as virtual
buttons. First, setup a :ref:`ektf2232-component` and then use this binary sensor platform
to create individual binary sensors for each virtual button.

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **name** (*Optional*, string): The name for the binary sensor.

- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.

- **ektf2232_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID of the component the sensor is part of.

- **x_min** (**Required**, int): Left coordinate of the screen area to be detected as the virtual button.

- **x_max** (**Required**, int): Right coordinate of the screen area to be detected as the virtual button.

- **y_min** (**Required**, int): Top coordinate of the screen area to be detected as the virtual button.

- **y_max** (**Required**, int): Bottom coordinate of the screen area to be detected as the virtual button.

- All other options from :ref:`Binary Sensor <config-binary_sensor>`.


See Also
--------

- :ref:`Binary Sensor Filters <binary_sensor-filters>`
- :doc:`Inkplate 6 Plus </components/display/inkplate6>`
- :apiref:`ektf2232/ektf2232.h`
- :apiref:`ektf2232/binary_sensor/ektf2232_binary_sensor.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
