components/binary_sensor/hydreon_rgxx.rst, before:

Hydreon Rain Sensor Binary Sensor
=================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up Hydreon rain sensors
    :image: hydreon_rg9.jpg
    :keywords: hydreon

The ``hydreon_rgxx`` binary sensor platform gives access to information provided by a Hydreon Rain Sensor.
For this sensor to work, a :doc:`/components/sensor/hydreon_rgxx` must be set up.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example RG-9 entry

    uart:
      rx_pin: GPIO16
      tx_pin: GPIO17
      baud_rate: 9600

    sensor:
      - platform: hydreon_rgxx
        model: "RG_9"
        id: "hydreon_1"
        update_interval: 1s
        moisture:
          name: "rain"
          expire_after: 30s

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: hydreon_rgxx
        hydreon_rgxx_id: "hydreon_1"
        too_cold:
          name: "too cold"

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **hydreon_rgxx_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): The ID of the Hydreon Rain Sensor display.

- **too_cold** (*Optional*): ``true`` if the sensor reports being too cold. Hydreon only mentions this feature for the RG-9.

  - **name** (**Required**, string): The name for the voltage sensor.

  - **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Set the ID of this sensor for use in lambdas.

  - All other options from :ref:`Binary Sensor <config-binary_sensor>`.


See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/sensor/hydreon_rgxx`
- :doc:`index`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

hydreon: Document temperature, lens_bad and em_sat

components/binary_sensor/hydreon_rgxx.rst, after:

Hydreon Rain Sensor Binary Sensor
=================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up Hydreon rain sensors
    :image: hydreon_rg9.jpg
    :keywords: hydreon

The ``hydreon_rgxx`` binary sensor platform gives access to information provided by a Hydreon Rain Sensor.
For this sensor to work, a :doc:`/components/sensor/hydreon_rgxx` must be set up.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example RG-9 entry

    uart:
      rx_pin: GPIO16
      tx_pin: GPIO17
      baud_rate: 9600

    sensor:
      - platform: hydreon_rgxx
        model: "RG_9"
        id: "hydreon_1"
        update_interval: 1s
        moisture:
          name: "rain"
          expire_after: 30s

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: hydreon_rgxx
        hydreon_rgxx_id: "hydreon_1"
        too_cold:
          name: "too cold"

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **hydreon_rgxx_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): The ID of the Hydreon Rain Sensor display.

- **too_cold** (*Optional*): ``true`` if the sensor reports being too cold. Hydreon only mentions this feature for the RG-9.

  - **name** (**Required**, string): The name for the sensor.

  - **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Set the ID of this sensor for use in lambdas.

  - All other options from :ref:`Binary Sensor <config-binary_sensor>`.

- **lens_bad** (*Optional*): ``true`` if the sensor reports the lens being bad.

  - **name** (**Required**, string): The name for the sensor.

  - **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Set the ID of this sensor for use in lambdas.

  - All other options from :ref:`Binary Sensor <config-binary_sensor>`.

- **em_sat** (*Optional*): ``true`` if the sensor reports the Emitter being saturated.

  - **name** (**Required**, string): The name for the sensor.

  - **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Set the ID of this sensor for use in lambdas.

  - All other options from :ref:`Binary Sensor <config-binary_sensor>`.


See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/sensor/hydreon_rgxx`
- :doc:`index`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
