components/binary_sensor/index.rst, before:

Binary Sensor Component
=======================

.. seo::
    :description: Information about the base representation of all binary sensors.
    :image: folder-open.png

With ESPHome you can use different types of binary sensors. They will
automatically appear in the Home Assistant front-end and have several
configuration options.


.. _config-binary_sensor:

Base Binary Sensor Configuration
--------------------------------

All binary sensors have a platform and an optional device class. By
default, the binary will chose the appropriate device class itself, but
you can always override it.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: ...
        device_class: motion

Configuration variables:

- **device_class** (*Optional*, string): The device class for the
  sensor. See https://www.home-assistant.io/components/binary_sensor/
  for a list of available options.
- **filters** (*Optional*, list): A list of filters to apply on the binary sensor values such as
  inverting signals. See :ref:`binary_sensor-filters`.

Automations:

- **on_press** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the button is pressed. See :ref:`binary_sensor-on_press`.
- **on_release** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the button is released. See :ref:`binary_sensor-on_release`.
- **on_state** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when a state is published. See :ref:`binary_sensor-on_state`.
- **on_click** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the button is held down for a specified period of time.
  See :ref:`binary_sensor-on_click`.
- **on_double_click** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the button is pressed twice for specified periods of time.
  See :ref:`binary_sensor-on_double_click`.
- **on_multi_click** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the button is pressed in a specific sequence.
  See :ref:`binary_sensor-on_multi_click`.

Advanced options:

- **internal** (*Optional*, boolean): Mark this component as internal. Internal components will
  not be exposed to the frontend (like Home Assistant). Only specifying an ``id`` without
  a ``name`` will implicitly set this to true.
- If MQTT enabled, all other options from :ref:`MQTT Component <config-mqtt-component>`.

.. _binary_sensor-filters:

Binary Sensor Filters
---------------------

With binary sensor filters you can customize how ESPHome handles your binary sensor values even more.
They are similar to :ref:`Sensor Filters <sensor-filters>`. All filters are processed in a pipeline.
This means all binary sensor filters are processed in the order given in the configuration (so order
of these entries matters!)

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: ...
        # ...
        filters:
          - invert:
          - delayed_on: 100ms
          - delayed_off: 100ms
          - delayed_on_off: 100ms
          - autorepeat:
            - delay: 1s
              time_off: 100ms
              time_on: 900ms
            - delay: 5s
              time_off: 100ms
              time_on: 400ms
          - lambda: |-
              if (id(other_binary_sensor).state) {
                return x;
              } else {
                return {};
              }

``invert``
**********

Simple filter that just inverts every value from the binary sensor.

``delayed_on``
**************

(**Required**, :ref:`config-time`): When a signal ON is received, wait for the specified time period until publishing
an ON state. If an OFF value is received while waiting, the ON action is discarded. Or in other words:
Only send an ON value if the binary sensor has stayed ON for at least the specified time period.
**Useful for debouncing push buttons**.

``delayed_off``
***************

(**Required**, :ref:`config-time`): When a signal OFF is received, wait for the specified time period until publishing
an OFF state. If an ON value is received while waiting, the OFF action is discarded. Or in other words:
Only send an OFF value if the binary sensor has stayed OFF for at least the specified time period.
**Useful for debouncing push buttons**.

``delayed_on_off``
******************

(**Required**, :ref:`config-time`): Only send an ON or OFF value if the binary sensor has stayed in the same state
for at least the specified time period.
**Useful for debouncing binary switches**.

``autorepeat``
**************

A filter implementing the autorepeat behavior. The filter is parametrized by a list of timing descriptions.
When a signal ON is received it is passed to the output and the first ``delay`` is started. When this
interval expires the output is turned OFF and toggles using the ``time_off`` and ``time_on`` durations
for the OFF and ON state respectively. At the same time the ``delay`` of the second timing description
is started and the process is repeated until the list is exhausted, in which case the timing of the
last description remains in use. Receiving an OFF signal stops the whole process and immediately outputs OFF.

The example thus waits one second with the output being ON, toggles it once per second for five seconds,
then toggles twice per second until OFF is received.

An ``autorepeat`` filter with no timing description is equivalent to one timing with all the parameters
set to default values.

Configuration variables:

- **delay** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): Delay to proceed to the next timing. Defaults to ``1s``.
- **time_off** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): Interval to hold the output at OFF. Defaults to ``100ms``.
- **time_on** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): Interval to hold the output at ON. Defaults to ``900ms``.

``lambda``
**********

Specify any :ref:`lambda <config-lambda>` for more complex filters. The input value from
the binary sensor is ``x`` and you can return ``true`` for ON, ``false`` for OFF, and ``{}`` to stop
the filter chain.

Binary Sensor Automation
------------------------

The triggers for binary sensors in ESPHome use the lingo from computer mouses.
For example, a ``press`` is triggered in the first moment when the button on your mouse is pushed down.

You can access the current state of the binary sensor in :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>` using
``id(binary_sensor_id).state``.

.. _binary_sensor-on_press:

``on_press``
************

This automation will be triggered when the button is first pressed down, or in other words on the leading
edge of the signal.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        # ...
        on_press:
          then:
            - switch.turn_on: relay_1

Configuration variables: See :ref:`Automation <automation>`.

.. _binary_sensor-on_release:

``on_release``
**************

This automation will be triggered when a button press ends, or in other words on the falling
edge of the signal.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        # ...
        on_release:
          then:
            - switch.turn_off: relay_1

Configuration variables: See :ref:`Automation <automation>`.

.. _binary_sensor-on_state:

``on_state``
************

This automation will be triggered when a new state is received (and thus combines ``on_press``
and ``on_release`` into one trigger). The new state will be given as the variable ``x`` as a boolean
and can be used in :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        # ...
        on_state:
          then:
            - switch.turn_off: relay_1

Configuration variables: See :ref:`Automation <automation>`.

.. _binary_sensor-on_click:

``on_click``
************

This automation will be triggered when a button is pressed down for a time period of length
``min_length`` to ``max_length``. Any click longer or shorter than this will not trigger the automation.
The automation is therefore also triggered on the falling edge of the signal.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        # ...
        on_click:
          min_length: 50ms
          max_length: 350ms
          then:
            - switch.turn_off: relay_1

Configuration variables:

- **min_length** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The minimum duration the click should last. Defaults to ``50ms``.
- **max_length** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The maximum duration the click should last. Defaults to ``350ms``.
- See :ref:`Automation <automation>`.

.. note::

    Multiple ``on_click`` entries can be defined like this (see also :ref:`binary_sensor-on_multi_click`
    for more complex matching):

    .. code-block:: yaml

        binary_sensor:
          - platform: gpio
            # ...
            on_click:
            - min_length: 50ms
              max_length: 350ms
              then:
                - switch.turn_off: relay_1
            - min_length: 500ms
              max_length: 1000ms
              then:
                - switch.turn_on: relay_1


.. _binary_sensor-on_double_click:

``on_double_click``
*******************

This automation will be triggered when a button is pressed down twice, with the first click lasting between
``min_length`` and ``max_length``. When a second leading edge then happens within ``min_length`` and
``max_length``, the automation is triggered.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        # ...
        on_double_click:
          min_length: 50ms
          max_length: 350ms
          then:
            - switch.turn_off: relay_1

Configuration variables:

- **min_length** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The minimum duration the click should last. Defaults to ``50ms``.
- **max_length** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The maximum duration the click should last. Defaults to ``350ms``.
- See :ref:`Automation <automation>`.

.. _binary_sensor-on_multi_click:

``on_multi_click``
******************

This automation will be triggered when a button is pressed in a user-specified sequence.


.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        # ...
        on_multi_click:
        - timing:
            - ON for at most 1s
            - OFF for at most 1s
            - ON for 0.5s to 1s
            - OFF for at least 0.2s
          then:
            - logger.log: "Double-Clicked"

Configuration variables:

- **timing** (**Required**): The timing of the multi click. This uses a language-based grammar using
  these styles:

  - ``<ON/OFF> for <TIME> to <TIME>``
  - ``<ON/OFF> for at least <TIME>``
  - ``<ON/OFF> for at most <TIME>``

- **invalid_cooldown** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): If a multi click is started, but the timing
  set in ``timing`` does not match, a "cool down" period will be activated during which no timing
  will be matched. Defaults to ``1s``.
- See :ref:`Automation <automation>`.

.. note::

    Getting the timing right for your use-case can sometimes be a bit difficult. If you set the
    :ref:`global log level <logger-log_levels>` to ``VERBOSE``, the multi click trigger shows logs
    about what stopped the trigger from happening.

You can use an ``OFF`` timing at the end of the timing sequence to differentiate between different
kinds of presses. For example the configuration below will differentiate between double, long and short
presses.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_multi_click:
    - timing:
        - ON for at most 1s
        - OFF for at most 1s
        - ON for at most 1s
        - OFF for at least 0.2s
      then:
        - logger.log: "Double Clicked"
    - timing:
        - ON for 1s to 2s
        - OFF for at least 0.5s
      then:
        - logger.log: "Single Long Clicked"
    - timing:
        - ON for at most 1s
        - OFF for at least 0.5s
      then:
        - logger.log: "Single Short Clicked"

.. _binary_sensor-is_on_condition:
.. _binary_sensor-is_off_condition:

``binary_sensor.is_on`` / ``binary_sensor.is_off`` Condition
************************************************************

This :ref:`Condition <config-condition>` checks if the given binary sensor is ON (or OFF).

.. code-block:: yaml

    # In some trigger:
    on_...:
      if:
        condition:
          # Same syntax for is_off
          binary_sensor.is_on: my_binary_sensor

.. _binary_sensor-lambda_calls:

lambda calls
************

From :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`, you can call several methods on all binary sensors to do some
advanced stuff.

- ``publish_state()``: Manually cause the binary sensor to publish and store a state from anywhere
  in the program.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      // Within lambda, publish an OFF state.
      id(my_binary_sensor).publish_state(false);

      // Within lambda, publish an ON state.
      id(my_binary_sensor).publish_state(true);

- ``.state``: Retrieve the current state of the binary sensor.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      // Within lambda, get the binary sensor state and conditionally do something
      if (id(my_binary_sensor).state) {
        // Binary sensor is ON, do something here
      } else {
        // Binary sensor is OFF, do something else here
      }


See Also
--------

- :apiref:`binary_sensor/binary_sensor.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1
    :glob:

    *

Commit message:

Add config option docs for disabled_by_default (#1361)

components/binary_sensor/index.rst, after:

Binary Sensor Component
=======================

.. seo::
    :description: Information about the base representation of all binary sensors.
    :image: folder-open.png

With ESPHome you can use different types of binary sensors. They will
automatically appear in the Home Assistant front-end and have several
configuration options.


.. _config-binary_sensor:

Base Binary Sensor Configuration
--------------------------------

All binary sensors have a platform and an optional device class. By
default, the binary will chose the appropriate device class itself, but
you can always override it.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: ...
        device_class: motion

Configuration variables:

- **device_class** (*Optional*, string): The device class for the
  sensor. See https://www.home-assistant.io/components/binary_sensor/
  for a list of available options.
- **filters** (*Optional*, list): A list of filters to apply on the binary sensor values such as
  inverting signals. See :ref:`binary_sensor-filters`.

Automations:

- **on_press** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the button is pressed. See :ref:`binary_sensor-on_press`.
- **on_release** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the button is released. See :ref:`binary_sensor-on_release`.
- **on_state** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when a state is published. See :ref:`binary_sensor-on_state`.
- **on_click** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the button is held down for a specified period of time.
  See :ref:`binary_sensor-on_click`.
- **on_double_click** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the button is pressed twice for specified periods of time.
  See :ref:`binary_sensor-on_double_click`.
- **on_multi_click** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the button is pressed in a specific sequence.
  See :ref:`binary_sensor-on_multi_click`.

Advanced options:

- **internal** (*Optional*, boolean): Mark this component as internal. Internal components will
  not be exposed to the frontend (like Home Assistant). Only specifying an ``id`` without
  a ``name`` will implicitly set this to true.
- **disabled_by_default** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, then this entity should not be added to any client's frontend,
  (usually Home Assistant) without the user manually enabling it (via the Home Assistant UI).
  Requires Home Assistant 2021.9 or newer. Defaults to ``false``.
- If MQTT enabled, all other options from :ref:`MQTT Component <config-mqtt-component>`.

.. _binary_sensor-filters:

Binary Sensor Filters
---------------------

With binary sensor filters you can customize how ESPHome handles your binary sensor values even more.
They are similar to :ref:`Sensor Filters <sensor-filters>`. All filters are processed in a pipeline.
This means all binary sensor filters are processed in the order given in the configuration (so order
of these entries matters!)

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: ...
        # ...
        filters:
          - invert:
          - delayed_on: 100ms
          - delayed_off: 100ms
          - delayed_on_off: 100ms
          - autorepeat:
            - delay: 1s
              time_off: 100ms
              time_on: 900ms
            - delay: 5s
              time_off: 100ms
              time_on: 400ms
          - lambda: |-
              if (id(other_binary_sensor).state) {
                return x;
              } else {
                return {};
              }

``invert``
**********

Simple filter that just inverts every value from the binary sensor.

``delayed_on``
**************

(**Required**, :ref:`config-time`): When a signal ON is received, wait for the specified time period until publishing
an ON state. If an OFF value is received while waiting, the ON action is discarded. Or in other words:
Only send an ON value if the binary sensor has stayed ON for at least the specified time period.
**Useful for debouncing push buttons**.

``delayed_off``
***************

(**Required**, :ref:`config-time`): When a signal OFF is received, wait for the specified time period until publishing
an OFF state. If an ON value is received while waiting, the OFF action is discarded. Or in other words:
Only send an OFF value if the binary sensor has stayed OFF for at least the specified time period.
**Useful for debouncing push buttons**.

``delayed_on_off``
******************

(**Required**, :ref:`config-time`): Only send an ON or OFF value if the binary sensor has stayed in the same state
for at least the specified time period.
**Useful for debouncing binary switches**.

``autorepeat``
**************

A filter implementing the autorepeat behavior. The filter is parametrized by a list of timing descriptions.
When a signal ON is received it is passed to the output and the first ``delay`` is started. When this
interval expires the output is turned OFF and toggles using the ``time_off`` and ``time_on`` durations
for the OFF and ON state respectively. At the same time the ``delay`` of the second timing description
is started and the process is repeated until the list is exhausted, in which case the timing of the
last description remains in use. Receiving an OFF signal stops the whole process and immediately outputs OFF.

The example thus waits one second with the output being ON, toggles it once per second for five seconds,
then toggles twice per second until OFF is received.

An ``autorepeat`` filter with no timing description is equivalent to one timing with all the parameters
set to default values.

Configuration variables:

- **delay** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): Delay to proceed to the next timing. Defaults to ``1s``.
- **time_off** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): Interval to hold the output at OFF. Defaults to ``100ms``.
- **time_on** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): Interval to hold the output at ON. Defaults to ``900ms``.

``lambda``
**********

Specify any :ref:`lambda <config-lambda>` for more complex filters. The input value from
the binary sensor is ``x`` and you can return ``true`` for ON, ``false`` for OFF, and ``{}`` to stop
the filter chain.

Binary Sensor Automation
------------------------

The triggers for binary sensors in ESPHome use the lingo from computer mouses.
For example, a ``press`` is triggered in the first moment when the button on your mouse is pushed down.

You can access the current state of the binary sensor in :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>` using
``id(binary_sensor_id).state``.

.. _binary_sensor-on_press:

``on_press``
************

This automation will be triggered when the button is first pressed down, or in other words on the leading
edge of the signal.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        # ...
        on_press:
          then:
            - switch.turn_on: relay_1

Configuration variables: See :ref:`Automation <automation>`.

.. _binary_sensor-on_release:

``on_release``
**************

This automation will be triggered when a button press ends, or in other words on the falling
edge of the signal.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        # ...
        on_release:
          then:
            - switch.turn_off: relay_1

Configuration variables: See :ref:`Automation <automation>`.

.. _binary_sensor-on_state:

``on_state``
************

This automation will be triggered when a new state is received (and thus combines ``on_press``
and ``on_release`` into one trigger). The new state will be given as the variable ``x`` as a boolean
and can be used in :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        # ...
        on_state:
          then:
            - switch.turn_off: relay_1

Configuration variables: See :ref:`Automation <automation>`.

.. _binary_sensor-on_click:

``on_click``
************

This automation will be triggered when a button is pressed down for a time period of length
``min_length`` to ``max_length``. Any click longer or shorter than this will not trigger the automation.
The automation is therefore also triggered on the falling edge of the signal.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        # ...
        on_click:
          min_length: 50ms
          max_length: 350ms
          then:
            - switch.turn_off: relay_1

Configuration variables:

- **min_length** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The minimum duration the click should last. Defaults to ``50ms``.
- **max_length** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The maximum duration the click should last. Defaults to ``350ms``.
- See :ref:`Automation <automation>`.

.. note::

    Multiple ``on_click`` entries can be defined like this (see also :ref:`binary_sensor-on_multi_click`
    for more complex matching):

    .. code-block:: yaml

        binary_sensor:
          - platform: gpio
            # ...
            on_click:
            - min_length: 50ms
              max_length: 350ms
              then:
                - switch.turn_off: relay_1
            - min_length: 500ms
              max_length: 1000ms
              then:
                - switch.turn_on: relay_1


.. _binary_sensor-on_double_click:

``on_double_click``
*******************

This automation will be triggered when a button is pressed down twice, with the first click lasting between
``min_length`` and ``max_length``. When a second leading edge then happens within ``min_length`` and
``max_length``, the automation is triggered.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        # ...
        on_double_click:
          min_length: 50ms
          max_length: 350ms
          then:
            - switch.turn_off: relay_1

Configuration variables:

- **min_length** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The minimum duration the click should last. Defaults to ``50ms``.
- **max_length** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The maximum duration the click should last. Defaults to ``350ms``.
- See :ref:`Automation <automation>`.

.. _binary_sensor-on_multi_click:

``on_multi_click``
******************

This automation will be triggered when a button is pressed in a user-specified sequence.


.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        # ...
        on_multi_click:
        - timing:
            - ON for at most 1s
            - OFF for at most 1s
            - ON for 0.5s to 1s
            - OFF for at least 0.2s
          then:
            - logger.log: "Double-Clicked"

Configuration variables:

- **timing** (**Required**): The timing of the multi click. This uses a language-based grammar using
  these styles:

  - ``<ON/OFF> for <TIME> to <TIME>``
  - ``<ON/OFF> for at least <TIME>``
  - ``<ON/OFF> for at most <TIME>``

- **invalid_cooldown** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): If a multi click is started, but the timing
  set in ``timing`` does not match, a "cool down" period will be activated during which no timing
  will be matched. Defaults to ``1s``.
- See :ref:`Automation <automation>`.

.. note::

    Getting the timing right for your use-case can sometimes be a bit difficult. If you set the
    :ref:`global log level <logger-log_levels>` to ``VERBOSE``, the multi click trigger shows logs
    about what stopped the trigger from happening.

You can use an ``OFF`` timing at the end of the timing sequence to differentiate between different
kinds of presses. For example the configuration below will differentiate between double, long and short
presses.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_multi_click:
    - timing:
        - ON for at most 1s
        - OFF for at most 1s
        - ON for at most 1s
        - OFF for at least 0.2s
      then:
        - logger.log: "Double Clicked"
    - timing:
        - ON for 1s to 2s
        - OFF for at least 0.5s
      then:
        - logger.log: "Single Long Clicked"
    - timing:
        - ON for at most 1s
        - OFF for at least 0.5s
      then:
        - logger.log: "Single Short Clicked"

.. _binary_sensor-is_on_condition:
.. _binary_sensor-is_off_condition:

``binary_sensor.is_on`` / ``binary_sensor.is_off`` Condition
************************************************************

This :ref:`Condition <config-condition>` checks if the given binary sensor is ON (or OFF).

.. code-block:: yaml

    # In some trigger:
    on_...:
      if:
        condition:
          # Same syntax for is_off
          binary_sensor.is_on: my_binary_sensor

.. _binary_sensor-lambda_calls:

lambda calls
************

From :ref:`lambdas <config-lambda>`, you can call several methods on all binary sensors to do some
advanced stuff.

- ``publish_state()``: Manually cause the binary sensor to publish and store a state from anywhere
  in the program.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      // Within lambda, publish an OFF state.
      id(my_binary_sensor).publish_state(false);

      // Within lambda, publish an ON state.
      id(my_binary_sensor).publish_state(true);

- ``.state``: Retrieve the current state of the binary sensor.

  .. code-block:: yaml

      // Within lambda, get the binary sensor state and conditionally do something
      if (id(my_binary_sensor).state) {
        // Binary sensor is ON, do something here
      } else {
        // Binary sensor is OFF, do something else here
      }


See Also
--------

- :apiref:`binary_sensor/binary_sensor.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1
    :glob:

    *
