components/microphone/i2s_audio.rst, before:

I²S Audio Microphone
====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up I²S based microphones in ESPHome.
    :image: i2s_audio.svg

The ``i2s_audio`` microphone platform allows you to receive audio via the the :doc:`/components/i2s_audio`.

This platform only works on ESP32 based chips.

.. warning::

    Audio and voice components consume a significant amount of resources (RAM, CPU) on the device.
    
    **Crashes are likely to occur** if you include too many additional components in your device's
    configuration. In particular, Bluetooth/BLE components are known to cause issues when used in
    combination with Voice Assistant and/or other audio components.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    microphone:
      - platform: i2s_audio
        id: external_mic
        adc_type: external
        i2s_din_pin: GPIO23

      - platform: i2s_audio
        id: adc_mic
        adc_type: internal
        adc_pin: GPIO35


Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **adc_type** (**Required**, enum):

  - ``external``: Use an external ADC connected to the I²S bus.
  - ``internal``: Use the internal ADC of the ESP32. Only supported on ESP32, no variant support.

- **channel** (*Optional*, enum): The channel of the microphone. One of ``left`` or ``right``. Defaults to ``right``.
- **bits_per_sample** (*Optional*, enum): The bit depth of the audio samples. Note that while set to ``32bit``, the samples
  will be scaled down to 16bit before being forwarded.
  One of ``16bit`` or ``32bit``. Defaults to ``16bit``.
- **i2s_audio_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): The ID of the :ref:`I²S Audio <i2s_audio>` you wish to use for this microphone.
- All other options from :ref:`Microphone <config-microphone>`

External ADC
------------

- **i2s_din_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The GPIO pin to use for the I²S ``DIN/SDIN`` *(Data In)* signal, also referred to as ``SD/SDATA`` *(Serial Data)* or ``ADCDAT`` *(Analog to Digital Converter Data)*.
- **pdm** (**Required**, boolean): Set this to ``true`` if your external ADC uses PDM (Pulse Density Modulation) instead of I²S.

  .. note::

      PDM microphones are only supported on ESP32 and ESP32-S3.

Internal ADC
------------

  .. note::

      Internal ADC microphones are only supported on a regular ESP32, not the variants.

- **adc_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The GPIO pin to use for the ADC input.


Known Devices
-------------

M5Stack Atom Echo
*****************

.. code-block:: yaml

    microphone:
      - platform: i2s_audio
        adc_type: external
        i2s_din_pin: GPIO23
        pdm: true

RaspiAudio Muse Luxe
********************

.. code-block:: yaml

    microphone:
      - platform: i2s_audio
        i2s_din_pin: GPIO35
        adc_type: external
        pdm: false


See also
--------

- :doc:`index`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Extend i2s config options
- added sample_rate
- added use_apll

Signed-off-by: Dusan Cervenka <cervenka.dusan@gmail.com>

components/microphone/i2s_audio.rst, after:

I²S Audio Microphone
====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up I²S based microphones in ESPHome.
    :image: i2s_audio.svg

The ``i2s_audio`` microphone platform allows you to receive audio via the the :doc:`/components/i2s_audio`.

This platform only works on ESP32 based chips.

.. warning::

    Audio and voice components consume a significant amount of resources (RAM, CPU) on the device.

    **Crashes are likely to occur** if you include too many additional components in your device's
    configuration. In particular, Bluetooth/BLE components are known to cause issues when used in
    combination with Voice Assistant and/or other audio components.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    microphone:
      - platform: i2s_audio
        id: external_mic
        adc_type: external
        i2s_din_pin: GPIO23

      - platform: i2s_audio
        id: adc_mic
        adc_type: internal
        adc_pin: GPIO35


Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **adc_type** (**Required**, enum):

  - ``external``: Use an external ADC connected to the I²S bus.
  - ``internal``: Use the internal ADC of the ESP32. Only supported on ESP32, no variant support.

- **channel** (*Optional*, enum): The channel of the microphone. One of ``left`` or ``right``. Defaults to ``right``.
- **sample_rate** (*Optional*, positive integer): I2S sample rate. Defaults to ``16000``.
- **bits_per_sample** (*Optional*, enum): The bit depth of the audio samples. Note that while set to ``32bit``, the samples
  will be scaled down to 16bit before being forwarded.
  One of ``16bit`` or ``32bit``. Defaults to ``16bit``.
- **use_apll** (*Optional*, boolean): I2S using APLL as main I2S clock, enable it to get accurate clock. Defaults to ``false``.
- **i2s_audio_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): The ID of the :ref:`I²S Audio <i2s_audio>` you wish to use for this microphone.
- All other options from :ref:`Microphone <config-microphone>`

External ADC
------------

- **i2s_din_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The GPIO pin to use for the I²S ``DIN/SDIN`` *(Data In)* signal, also referred to as ``SD/SDATA`` *(Serial Data)* or ``ADCDAT`` *(Analog to Digital Converter Data)*.
- **pdm** (**Required**, boolean): Set this to ``true`` if your external ADC uses PDM (Pulse Density Modulation) instead of I²S.

  .. note::

      PDM microphones are only supported on ESP32 and ESP32-S3.

Internal ADC
------------

  .. note::

      Internal ADC microphones are only supported on a regular ESP32, not the variants.

- **adc_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The GPIO pin to use for the ADC input.


Known Devices
-------------

M5Stack Atom Echo
*****************

.. code-block:: yaml

    microphone:
      - platform: i2s_audio
        adc_type: external
        i2s_din_pin: GPIO23
        pdm: true

RaspiAudio Muse Luxe
********************

.. code-block:: yaml

    microphone:
      - platform: i2s_audio
        i2s_din_pin: GPIO35
        adc_type: external
        pdm: false


See also
--------

- :doc:`index`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
