components/switch/ble_client.rst, before:

BLE Client Switch
=================

.. seo::
    :description: Control the state of BLE clients.
    :image: bluetooth.svg

The ``ble_client`` component is a switch platform that is used to enable
and disable a ``ble_client``. This has several uses, such as minimizing
battery usage or for allowing other clients (Eg phone apps) to connect to
the device.

For more information on BLE services and characteristics, see
:doc:`/components/ble_client`.

.. code-block:: yaml

    esp32_ble_tracker:

    ble_client:
      - mac_address: FF:FF:20:00:0F:15
        id: itag_black

    switch:
      - platform: ble_client
        ble_client_id: itag_black
        name: "Enable iTag"

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **ble_client_id** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): ID of the associated BLE client.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): The ID to use for code generation, and for reference by dependent components.
- All other options from :ref:`Switch <config-switch>`.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/ble_client`
- :apiref:`ble_client/switch/ble_switch.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add resource warnings to BLE, voice and audio component docs

components/switch/ble_client.rst, after:

BLE Client Switch
=================

.. seo::
    :description: Control the state of BLE clients.
    :image: bluetooth.svg

The ``ble_client`` component is a switch platform that is used to enable and disable a ``ble_client``. This has
several uses, such as minimizing battery usage or for allowing other clients (Eg phone apps) to connect to the device.

For more information on BLE services and characteristics, see :doc:`/components/ble_client`.

.. warning::

    The BLE software stack on the ESP32 consumes a significant amount of RAM on the device.
    
    **Crashes are likely to occur** if you include too many additional components in your device's
    configuration. Memory-intensive components such as :doc:`/components/voice_assistant` and other
    audio components are most likely to cause issues.

.. code-block:: yaml

    esp32_ble_tracker:

    ble_client:
      - mac_address: FF:FF:20:00:0F:15
        id: itag_black

    switch:
      - platform: ble_client
        ble_client_id: itag_black
        name: "Enable iTag"

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **ble_client_id** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): ID of the associated BLE client.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): The ID to use for code generation, and for reference by dependent components.
- All other options from :ref:`Switch <config-switch>`.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/ble_client`
- :apiref:`ble_client/switch/ble_switch.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
