components/switch/custom.rst, before:

Custom Switch
=============

This integration can be used to create custom switches in ESPHome
using the C++ (Arduino) API.

Please first read :doc:`/components/sensor/custom` guide,
the same principles apply here.

The example below is an example of a custom switch; this custom switch is essentially the
same as the gpio switch implementation.

.. code-block:: cpp

    #include "esphome.h"

    class MyCustomSwitch : public Component, public Switch {
     public:
      void setup() override {
        // This will be called by App.setup()
        pinMode(5, INPUT);
      }
      void write_state(bool state) override {
        // This will be called every time the user requests a state change.

        digitalWrite(5, state);

        // Acknowledge new state by publishing it
        publish_state(state);
      }
    };

(Store this file in your configuration directory, for example ``my_switch.h``)

And in YAML:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    esphome:
      includes:
        - my_switch.h

    switch:
    - platform: custom
      lambda: |-
        auto my_custom_switch = new MyCustomSwitch();
        App.register_component(my_custom_switch);
        return {my_custom_switch};

      switches:
        name: "My Custom Switches"
        id: my_custom_switch

Configuration variables:

- **lambda** (**Required**, :ref:`lambda <config-lambda>`): The lambda to run for instantiating the
  switch(es).
- **switches** (**Required**, list): A list of switches to initialize. The length here
  must equal the number of items in the ``return`` statement of the ``lambda``.

  - All options from :ref:`Switch <config-switch>`.

See :apiclass:`Switch <switch_::Switch>`

See Also
--------

- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add deprecation message to custom component pages (#3318)

components/switch/custom.rst, after:

Custom Switch
=============

.. warning::

    Custom components are deprecated, not recommended for new configurations
    and will be removed from ESPHome in a future release.
    Please look at creating a real ESPHome component and "importing" it into your
    configuration with :doc:`/components/external_components`.

    You can find some basic documentation on creating your own components
    at :ref:`contributing_to_esphome`.

This integration can be used to create custom switches in ESPHome
using the C++ (Arduino) API.

Please first read :doc:`/components/sensor/custom` guide,
the same principles apply here.

The example below is an example of a custom switch; this custom switch is essentially the
same as the gpio switch implementation.

.. code-block:: cpp

    #include "esphome.h"

    class MyCustomSwitch : public Component, public Switch {
     public:
      void setup() override {
        // This will be called by App.setup()
        pinMode(5, INPUT);
      }
      void write_state(bool state) override {
        // This will be called every time the user requests a state change.

        digitalWrite(5, state);

        // Acknowledge new state by publishing it
        publish_state(state);
      }
    };

(Store this file in your configuration directory, for example ``my_switch.h``)

And in YAML:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    esphome:
      includes:
        - my_switch.h

    switch:
    - platform: custom
      lambda: |-
        auto my_custom_switch = new MyCustomSwitch();
        App.register_component(my_custom_switch);
        return {my_custom_switch};

      switches:
        name: "My Custom Switches"
        id: my_custom_switch

Configuration variables:

- **lambda** (**Required**, :ref:`lambda <config-lambda>`): The lambda to run for instantiating the
  switch(es).
- **switches** (**Required**, list): A list of switches to initialize. The length here
  must equal the number of items in the ``return`` statement of the ``lambda``.

  - All options from :ref:`Switch <config-switch>`.

See :apiclass:`Switch <switch_::Switch>`

See Also
--------

- :ghedit:`Edit`
