components/text_sensor/wifi_info.rst, before:

WiFi Info Text Sensor
=====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up WiFi info text sensors.
    :image: network-wifi.svg

The ``wifi_info`` text sensor platform exposes different WiFi information
via text sensors.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    text_sensor:
      - platform: wifi_info
        ip_address:
          name: ESP IP Address
        ssid:
          name: ESP Connected SSID
        bssid:
          name: ESP Connected BSSID
        mac_address:
          name: ESP Mac Wifi Address
        scan_results:
          name: ESP Latest Scan Results
        dns_address:
          name: ESP DNS Address

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **ip_address** (*Optional*): Expose the IP Address of the ESP as a text sensor. All options from
  :ref:`Text Sensor <config-text_sensor>`.
- **ssid** (*Optional*): Expose the SSID of the currently connected WiFi network as a text sensor. All options from
  :ref:`Text Sensor <config-text_sensor>`.
- **bssid** (*Optional*): Expose the BSSID of the currently connected WiFi network as a text sensor. All options from
  :ref:`Text Sensor <config-text_sensor>`.
- **mac_address** (*Optional*): Expose the Mac Address of the WiFi card. All options from
  :ref:`Text Sensor <config-text_sensor>`.
- **scan_results** (*Optional*): Expose the latest networks found during the latest scan. All options from
  :ref:`Text Sensor <config-text_sensor>`.
- **dns_address** (*Optional*): Expose the DNS Address of the ESP as text sensor.
  :ref:`Text Sensor <config-text_sensor>`.


See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/wifi`
- :doc:`/components/sensor/wifi_signal`
- :apiref:`wifi_info/wifi_info_text_sensor.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Document new parameter `min_ipv6_addr_count` and sub sensors for wifi_info and ethernet_info (#3234)
Co-authored-by: Jesse Hills <3060199+jesserockz@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: ghsensdev <145111396+ghsensdev@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Daniel Baulig <me@danielbaulig.de>

components/text_sensor/wifi_info.rst, after:

WiFi Info Text Sensor
=====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up WiFi info text sensors.
    :image: network-wifi.svg

The ``wifi_info`` text sensor platform exposes different WiFi information
via text sensors.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    text_sensor:
      - platform: wifi_info
        ip_address:
          name: ESP IP Address
          address_0:
            name: ESP IP Address 0
          address_1:
            name: ESP IP Address 1
          address_2:
            name: ESP IP Address 2
          address_3:
            name: ESP IP Address 3
          address_4:
            name: ESP IP Address 4
        ssid:
          name: ESP Connected SSID
        bssid:
          name: ESP Connected BSSID
        mac_address:
          name: ESP Mac Wifi Address
        scan_results:
          name: ESP Latest Scan Results
        dns_address:
          name: ESP DNS Address

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **ip_address** (*Optional*): Expose the IP Address of the ESP as a text sensor. All options from
  :ref:`Text Sensor <config-text_sensor>`.
- **address_0-address_4** (*Optional*): With dual stack (IPv4 and IPv6) the device will have at least two IP addresses -- often more. To report all addresses the configuration may have up to five sub-sensors. All options from
  :ref:`Text Sensor <config-text_sensor>`.
- **ssid** (*Optional*): Expose the SSID of the currently connected WiFi network as a text sensor. All options from
  :ref:`Text Sensor <config-text_sensor>`.
- **bssid** (*Optional*): Expose the BSSID of the currently connected WiFi network as a text sensor. All options from
  :ref:`Text Sensor <config-text_sensor>`.
- **mac_address** (*Optional*): Expose the Mac Address of the WiFi card. All options from
  :ref:`Text Sensor <config-text_sensor>`.
- **scan_results** (*Optional*): Expose the latest networks found during the latest scan. All options from
  :ref:`Text Sensor <config-text_sensor>`.
- **dns_address** (*Optional*): Expose the DNS Address of the ESP as text sensor.
  :ref:`Text Sensor <config-text_sensor>`.


See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/wifi`
- :doc:`/components/sensor/wifi_signal`
- :apiref:`wifi_info/wifi_info_text_sensor.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
