DAC7678
=======

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up the DAC7678.
    :image: dac7678.svg
    :keywords: DAC7678

.. _dac7678-component:

Component/Hub
-------------

The DAC7678 component represents a DAC7678 12-bit DAC with internal reference
(`datasheet <https://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/dac7678.pdf>`__) in ESPHome. It
uses the :ref:`I²C Bus <i2c>` for communication.

To use the channels of this components, you first need to setup the
global ``dac7678`` hub and give it an id, and then define the
:ref:`individual output channels <dac7678-output>`.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    dac7678:
	  address: 0x4A
	  id: dac7678_hub1
	  internal_reference: true

    # Individual outputs
    output:
      - platform: dac7678
        dac7678_id: 'dac7678_hub1'
        channel: 0

Configuration variables:
************************

-  **address** (*Optional*, int): The I²C address of the driver.
   Defaults to ``0x48``.
-  **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): The id to use for
   this dac7678 component. Use this if you have multiple DAC7678s connected at the same time
-  **internal_reference** (*Optional*, bool): State if the internal reference
   Defaults to ``false``.

.. _dac7678-output:

DAC Output
----------

The DAC7678 output component exposes a DAC7678 DAC channel of a global
:ref:`DAC7678 hub <dac7678-component>` as a float
output.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    dac7678:
      - frequency: 500

    # Individual outputs
    output:
      - platform: dac7678
        id: 'dac7678_output1'
        channel: 0

Configuration variables:
************************

- **id** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id to use for this output component.
- **channel** (**Required**, int): Chose the channel of the DAC7678 of
  this output component. Must be in range from 0 to 7.
- **dac7678_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID of the
  :ref:`DAC7678 hub <dac7678-component>`.
  Use this if you have multiple DAC7678s you want to use at the same time.
- All other options from :ref:`Output <config-output>`.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/output/index`
- :apiref:`dac7678/dac7678_output.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
