components/output/sigma_delta.rst, before:

Sigma-Delta Output
==================

This integration uses `sigma-delta modulation <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delta-sigma_modulation>`__
to output a floating-point value on a binary output. Unlike with :doc:`/components/output/slow_pwm`,
it is possible to update the output value with each update cycle, not at the end of a long period.

If you choose to toggle the output at most once every 1 seconds and decide on a
PWM period of 10 seconds, for reasonably frequent updates, there are only 10
possible levels, while for higher precision a long update interval is needed,
restricting the update rate. A sigma-delta output can be updated during each cycle.

.. figure:: images/sigma-delta-example.png
    :align: center
    :width: 40.0%

    Comparison between a PWM with a period of 10s and 1s steps and a sigma-delta output with 1s steps

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    output:
      - platform: sigma_delta_output
        update_interval: 60s
        output: heater_relay
        id: sd_heater_output


Configuration variables:

- **update_interval** (**Required**, :ref:`Time <config-time>`): The interval
  at which the output is recalculated.
- **output** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The ID of an :doc:`/components/output/index`.
- All options from :ref:`Output <config-output>`.

Commit message:

Document new sigma-delta output options

components/output/sigma_delta.rst, after:

Sigma-Delta Output
==================

This integration uses `sigma-delta modulation <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delta-sigma_modulation>`__
to output a floating-point value on a binary output. Unlike with :doc:`/components/output/slow_pwm`,
it is possible to update the output value with each update cycle, not at the end of a long period.

If you choose to toggle the output at most once every 1 seconds and decide on a
PWM period of 10 seconds, for reasonably frequent updates, there are only 10
possible levels, while for higher precision a long update interval is needed,
restricting the update rate. A sigma-delta output can be updated during each cycle.

.. figure:: images/sigma-delta-example.png
    :align: center
    :width: 40.0%

    Comparison between a PWM with a period of 10s and 1s steps and a sigma-delta output with 1s steps

This component can be used as a drop-in replacement for
:doc:`/components/output/slow_pwm` by changing the ``platform`` to
``sigma_delta_output`` and renaming ``period`` to ``update_interval``.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    output:
      - platform: sigma_delta_output
        update_interval: 60s
        output: heater_relay
        id: sd_heater_output


Configuration variables:

- **update_interval** (**Required**, :ref:`Time <config-time>`): The interval
  at which the output is recalculated.
- **output** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): The ID of an :doc:`/components/output/index`.
- **pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The pin to pulse.
- **state_change_action** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform when the load is switched. If a lambda is used the boolean ``state`` parameter holds the new status.
- **turn_on_action** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform when the load is turned on. Can be used to control for example a switch or output component.
- **turn_off_action** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform when the load is turned off. ``turn_on_action`` and ``turn_off_action`` must be configured together.
- All options from :ref:`Output <config-output>`.
