components/esp32_ble_server.rst, before:

BLE Server
==========

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up Bluetooth LE GATT Server in ESPHome.
    :image: bluetooth.svg

The ``esp32_ble_server`` component in ESPHome sets up a simple BLE GATT server that exposes the device name,
manufacturer and board. This component allows other components to create their own services to expose
data and control.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration

    esp32_ble_server:
      manufacturer: "Orange"
      manufacturer_data: [0x4C, 0, 0x23, 77, 0xF0 ]


Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **manufacturer** (*Optional*, string): The name of the manufacturer/firmware creator. Defaults to ``ESPHome``.
- **model** (*Optional*, string): The model name of the device. Defaults to the friendly name of the ``board`` chosen
  in the :ref:`core configuration <esphome-configuration_variables>`.
- **manufacturer_data** (*Optional*, list of bytes): The manufacturer-specific data to include in the advertising
  packet. Should be a list of bytes, where the first two are the little-endian representation of the 16-bit
  manufacturer ID as assigned by the Bluetooth SIG.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`esp32_ble`
- :doc:`esp32_improv`
- :apiref:`esp32_ble/ble.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add resource warnings to BLE, voice and audio component docs

components/esp32_ble_server.rst, after:

BLE Server
==========

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up Bluetooth LE GATT Server in ESPHome.
    :image: bluetooth.svg

The ``esp32_ble_server`` component in ESPHome sets up a simple BLE GATT server that exposes the device name,
manufacturer and board. This component allows other components to create their own services to expose
data and control.

.. warning::

    The BLE software stack on the ESP32 consumes a significant amount of RAM on the device.
    
    **Crashes are likely to occur** if you include too many additional components in your device's
    configuration. Memory-intensive components such as :doc:`/components/voice_assistant` and other
    audio components are most likely to cause issues.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration

    esp32_ble_server:
      manufacturer: "Orange"
      manufacturer_data: [0x4C, 0, 0x23, 77, 0xF0 ]


Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **manufacturer** (*Optional*, string): The name of the manufacturer/firmware creator. Defaults to ``ESPHome``.
- **model** (*Optional*, string): The model name of the device. Defaults to the friendly name of the ``board`` chosen
  in the :ref:`core configuration <esphome-configuration_variables>`.
- **manufacturer_data** (*Optional*, list of bytes): The manufacturer-specific data to include in the advertising
  packet. Should be a list of bytes, where the first two are the little-endian representation of the 16-bit
  manufacturer ID as assigned by the Bluetooth SIG.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`esp32_ble`
- :doc:`esp32_improv`
- :apiref:`esp32_ble/ble.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
