ESP8266 Platform
================

.. seo::
    :description: Configuration for the ESP8266 platform for ESPHome.
    :image: esp8266.svg

This component contains platform-specific options for the ESP8266 platform.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    esp8266:
      board: nodemcuv2
      framework:
        version: recommended

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **board** (**Required**, string): The PlatformIO board ID that should
  be used. Choose the appropriate board from
  `this list <https://registry.platformio.org/platforms/platformio/espressif8266/boards>`__ (the icon next to the
  name can be used to copy the board ID). *This only affects pin aliases, flash size and some internal settings*, if unsure
  choose a generic board from Espressif such as ``esp01_1m``.
- **framework** (*Optional*): Options for the underlying framework used by ESPHome.

  - **version** (*Optional*, string): The base framework version number to use, from
    `esp8266 arduino releases <https://github.com/esp8266/Arduino/releases>`__. Defaults to ``recommended``. Additional values

    - ``dev``: Use the latest commit from https://github.com/esp8266/Arduino, note this may break at any time
    - ``latest``: Use the latest *release* from https://github.com/esp8266/Arduino/releases, even if it hasn't been recommended yet.
    - ``recommended``: Use the recommended framework version.

  - **source** (*Optional*, string): The PlatformIO package or repository to use for the framework. This can be used to use a custom or patched version of the framework.
  - **platform_version** (*Optional*, string): The version of the `platformio/espressif8266 <https://github.com/platformio/platform-espressif8266/releases/>`__ package to use.

- **restore_from_flash** (*Optional*, boolean): Whether to store some persistent preferences in flash memory. Defaults to ``false``.
- **board_flash_mode** (*Optional*, string): The SPI mode of the flash chip. One of ``qio``, ``qout``, ``dio`` and ``dout``. Defaults to ``dout`` for compatibility with all chips. Note: on the next OTA update the actual flash mode is automatically detected and changed to the appropriate one.
- **early_pin_init** (*Optional*, boolean): Specifies whether pins should be initialised as early as possible to known values. Recommended value is ``false`` where switches are involved, as these will toggle when updating the firmware or when restarting the device. Defaults to ``true``.

GPIO Pin Numbering
------------------

Many boards have a pin numbering for the exposed pins that is different from the internally used
ones. ESPHome tries to map the silk-screen pin numbers into the internal pin numbers with a few
boards, but for generic ESP8266 boards it is often required to just use the internal pin numbers.
To do this, just prefix all pins with ``GPIO``, for example ``GPIO0`` for the pin with the internal pin
number 0.

Some notes on the pins:

- ``GPIO6`` - ``GPIO11``, ``GPIO0``, ``GPIO2`` and ``GPIO15`` are often already used by the internal
  flash interface and boot mode detection. So it's best to avoid using these pins.
- ``GPIO17`` additionally has an ADC connected to it. See the :doc:`/components/sensor/adc`
  to read voltages (in the range from 0 to 1.0V) on this pin.


.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    esphome:
      name: livingroom

    esp8266:
      board: nodemcuv2

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        name: "Pin GPIO17"
        pin: GPIO17


Special Pins
^^^^^^^^^^^^

=================== =============================================
``GPIO0``           Controls Boot Mode
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO1``           UART TX pin
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO2``           Controls Boot Mode
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO3``           UART RX pin
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO6``           SDIO/Flash CLK pin
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO7``           SDIO/Flash Data 0 pin
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO8``           SDIO/Flash Data 1 pin
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO9``           SDIO/Flash Data 2 pin (qio/qout only)
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO10``          SDIO/Flash Data 3 pin (qio/qout only)
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO11``          SDIO/Flash CMD pin
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO12``          Attached to Hardware SPI controller MISO
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO13``          Attached to Hardware SPI controller MOSI
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO14``          Attached to Hardware SPI controller CLK
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO15``          Controls Boot Mode; Attached to Hardware SPI
                    controller CS
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
``GPIO16``          Special pin that can be accessed from RTC,
                    and is Deep-Sleep wakeup pin
------------------- ---------------------------------------------
TOUT aka ``GPIO17`` ADC pin for measuring voltages, can only be
                    used as analog input pin
=================== =============================================

This means effectively only the following pins can be used as general purpose GPIO:

========== ============================== ==============================
**Pin**    **Restrictions**               **State after Reset**
---------- ------------------------------ ------------------------------
``GPIO0``  If HIGH on boot                Weak Pull Up
---------- ------------------------------ ------------------------------
``GPIO2``  If HIGH on boot                Weak Pull Up
---------- ------------------------------ ------------------------------
``GPIO4``                                 High Impedance
---------- ------------------------------ ------------------------------
``GPIO5``                                 High Impedance
---------- ------------------------------ ------------------------------
``GPIO6``                                 Weak Pull Up
---------- ------------------------------ ------------------------------
``GPIO12``                                Weak Pull Up
---------- ------------------------------ ------------------------------
``GPIO13``                                Weak Pull Up
---------- ------------------------------ ------------------------------
``GPIO14``                                Weak Pull Up
---------- ------------------------------ ------------------------------
``GPIO15`` If LOW on boot                 Weak Pull Up
---------- ------------------------------ ------------------------------
``GPIO16`` Has pull-down (but no pull-up) Weak Pull Down
           resistor
========== ============================== ==============================


Boot Modes
----------

On each boot, the ESP8266 will check three pins to determine in which boot mode to enter.
There are three boot modes:

========================= ========= ========= ========== ==============
**Mode**                  ``GPIO0`` ``GPIO2`` ``GPIO15`` ``boot mode:``
------------------------- --------- --------- ---------- --------------
Boot from Flash (normal)  HIGH      HIGH      LOW        3
------------------------- --------- --------- ---------- --------------
Download Code from UART   LOW       HIGH      LOW        1
------------------------- --------- --------- ---------- --------------
Boot from SD-Card         ANY       ANY       HIGH       4-7
========================= ========= ========= ========== ==============

You can identify these on boot-up by looking at the UART output, the first number
in the ``boot mode:`` line tells you what mode was selected

.. code-block:: text

    ets Jan  8 2013,rst cause:4, boot mode:(3,6)

The first lines when viewing the UART logs might have unrecognized characters. This is
because the effective baudrate of the ESP8266 bootloader is 74800, whereas the program uses 115200.

Reset Causes
------------

Additionally, the first line also contains the **reset cause**.
These reset causes `are documented
<https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp8266_reset_causes_and_common_fatal_exception_causes_en.pdf>`__:

== ===================================
0  Undefined
-- -----------------------------------
1  Power On Reboot
-- -----------------------------------
2  External reset or deep-sleep wakeup
-- -----------------------------------
4  Hardware WDT reset
== ===================================

After a software reset, the reset cause will not change.

Electrical Characteristics
--------------------------

=========================================================== =========== =========== =========== ===========
**Parameter**                                               **Min.**    **Typical** **Max.**    **Unit**
----------------------------------------------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
Operating Temperature                                       -40                     125         °C
----------------------------------------------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
Working Voltage ``V_IO``                                    2.5         3.3         3.6         V
----------------------------------------------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
``V_IL`` - INPUT voltage level to be considered LOW         -0.3                    0.25*V_IO   V
----------------------------------------------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
``V_IH`` - INPUT voltage level to be considered HIGH        0.75*V_IO               3.6         V
----------------------------------------------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
``V_OL`` - OUTPUT voltage level for LOW                                             0.1*V_IO    V
----------------------------------------------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
``V_OH`` - OUTPUT voltage level for HIGH                    0.8*V_IO                            V
----------------------------------------------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
``I_MAX`` - Maximum current for GPIO                                                12          mA
----------------------------------------------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
Power Consumption in Deep Sleep                                         20                      µA
----------------------------------------------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
Power Consumption in Active Mode                                        120                     mA
=========================================================== =========== =========== =========== ===========

Source: `ESP8266EX datasheet <https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/0a-esp8266ex_datasheet_en.pdf>`__

The internal pull up/down resistors have values of 30kΩ to 100kΩ
(`source <https://bbs.espressif.com/viewtopic.php?t=1079>`__).

See Also
--------

- :doc:`esphome`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
