.. _mpu6050:

MPU6050 Accelerometer and Gyroscope
===================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up the MPU6050 Accelerometer and Gyroscope base component.
    :image: mpu6050.jpg
    :keywords: i2c

This component sets the base configuration of the MPU6050 Accelerometer and Gyroscope device.

The :ref:`I²C Bus <i2c>` is required to be set up in your configuration for this sensor to work, 
and this component is needed to set up the :ref:`mpu6050 sensor <mpu6050_sensor>`.

This component can be used alone if the only needed feature is to trigger an interrupt on motion detection.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry 
    mpu6050:
      id: my_mpu6050
      address: 0x68
      i2c_id: i2c_bus
      interrupt:
        threshold: 2
        duration: 2ms

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **address** (*Optional*, int): Manually specify the I²C address of the sensor. Defaults to ``0x68``.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **i2c_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID of the :ref:`I²C Component <i2c>` if you want
  to use multiple I²C buses.
- **interrupt** (*Optional*, boolean or schema): Enable motion interrupt. Defaults to ``false``. If ``true``, uses maximal sensitivity as defaults.

  - **threshold** (*Required*, int): Motion threshold, in range 1-255. Lower values are more sensitive, and the unit is ``2mg`` 
    (See `Jeff Rowberg's i2cdevlib <https://github.com/jrowberg/i2cdevlib/blob/19c420b6798872ee91e85fc5f522fbc5b8771194/Arduino/MPU6050/MPU6050.cpp#L496-L502>`__).
  - **duration** (*Required*, :ref:`config-time`): Minimum motion duration to trigger an interrupt, in the range 1ms-255ms.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/i2c`
- :ref:`mpu6050 sensor <mpu6050_sensor>`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
