components/outlaw_990.rst, before:

Outlaw Audio 990 AV Preamp/Processor Custom ESPHome Component
=============================================================

This custom component will communicate with an Outlaw Audio 990 via
RS232 serial port (UART) to provide control and status feedback. You can
use the component in automations, or to create a basic remote control in
the Dashboard.

ESPHome Configuration
---------------------

Required additions to your ESPHome ``yaml`` file below (set rx and tx
pins of the UART as needed):

::

   uart:
     rx_pin: GPIO14
     tx_pin: GPIO13
     baud_rate: 9600
     id: uart1

   outlaw_990:
     id: outlaw
     uart_id: uart1

   binary_sensor:
     - platform: outlaw_990
       sensor_power:
         name: "Outlaw Power Status"
       sensor_mute:
         name: "Outlaw Mute Status"

   sensor:
     - platform: outlaw_990
       sensor_volume:
         name: "Outlaw Volume Status"

   text_sensor:
     - platform: outlaw_990
       sensor_display:
         name: "Outlaw Display"
       sensor_audio_in:
         name: "Outlaw Audio Input"
       sensor_video_in:
         name: "Outlaw Video Input"

Sensors
-------

This component provides several sensors.

Binary Sensors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  ``sensor_power`` - Power Status (``true`` means ON)
-  ``sensor_mute`` - Mute Status (``true`` means MUTED)

.. _sensors-1:

Sensors
~~~~~~~

-  ``sensor_volume`` - Volume Level (-76 to +14 dB)

Text Sensors
~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  ``sensor_display`` - Text as displayed on face of unit
-  ``sensor_audio_in`` - Text label of current audio input
-  ``sensor_video_in`` - Text label of current video input
-  

Services
--------

``outlaw_power`` - Discrete Power On/Off
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This service will control the power of the unit, on or off, based on the
``power`` parameter supplied.

``outlaw_mute`` - Toggle Mute
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This service will toggle the current mute state. The native protocol
does not allow directly setting mute on or off. A future version may
provide a means to fake that functionality.

``outlaw_volume_adj`` - Adjust Volume
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This service will adjust the volume up or down by 1dB, controlled by the
supplied ``up`` parameter. The native protocol of the Outlaw does not
allow setting a specific volume level. A future version may provide a
means to fake that functionality.

``outlaw_cmd`` - Send Command
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This service will send a protocol control code specified in the ``cmd``
parameter to the unit. The full list of commands is in the `protocol
specification <http://outlawaudio.com/outlaw/docs/990rs232protocol.pdf>`__.
Note that the service expects a decimal value, so the hex values in the
document will need to be converted.

Think of this service as a means of virtually “pressing” remote control
buttons. That is the general paradigm of the Outlaw 990 serial protocol.

Example Dashboard Configuration
-------------------------------

The code for an example remote control Lovelace dashboard card is shown
below. Note that it uses the entity names as configured above. The card
is also conditional, and it will not be shown if the ESPHome device is
unavailable. Additional elements within the card are also conditional
based on whether the Outlaw is turned on.

Dashboard Example

Code for the dashboard example:

::

   type: conditional
   conditions:
     - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
       state_not: unavailable
   card:
     type: vertical-stack
     cards:
       - type: horizontal-stack
         cards:
           - show_name: true
             show_icon: true
             name: Power
             type: button
             tap_action:
               action: call-service
               service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_power
               data:
                 power: true
               target: {}
             entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
             icon_height: 32px
             hold_action:
               action: call-service
               service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_power
               data:
                 power: false
               target: {}
             icon: mdi:power
             show_state: true
           - type: conditional
             conditions:
               - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
                 state: 'on'
             card:
               show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               name: Mute
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_mute
                 data: {}
                 target: {}
               entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_mute_status
               icon_height: 32px
               icon: mdi:volume-off
               show_state: true
           - type: conditional
             conditions:
               - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
                 state: 'on'
             card:
               type: entity
               entity: sensor.outlaw_volume_status
               icon: mdi:volume-low
               name: Volume
       - type: conditional
         conditions:
           - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
             state: 'on'
         card:
           type: horizontal-stack
           cards:
             - show_name: false
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_volume_adj
                 data:
                   up: false
                 target: {}
               entity: ''
               icon: mdi:arrow-down-box
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_volume_adj
                 data:
                   up: true
                 target: {}
               entity: ''
               icon: mdi:arrow-up-box
       - type: markdown
         content: >
           # <center> {{ states('sensor.outlaw_display') + ' ' | replace(' ',
           '\u2800') }} </center>
         style:
           text-align: center
       - type: conditional
         conditions:
           - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
             state: 'on'
         card:
           type: horizontal-stack
           cards:
             - type: markdown
               content: |
                 <center> Audio In </center>

                 # <center> {{ states.sensor.outlaw_audio_input.state }} </center>
             - type: markdown
               content: |
                 <center> Video In </center>

                 # <center> {{ states.sensor.outlaw_video_input.state }} </center>
       - type: conditional
         conditions:
           - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
             state: 'on'
         card:
           type: horizontal-stack
           cards:
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 3
                 target: {}
               icon: mdi:radio
               name: Tuner
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 4
                 target: {}
               name: CD
               icon: mdi:disc-player
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 5
                 target: {}
               name: Aux/USB
               icon: mdi:usb
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 7
                 target: {}
               icon: mdi:disc-player
               name: DVD
       - type: conditional
         conditions:
           - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
             state: 'on'
         card:
           type: horizontal-stack
           cards:
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 8
                 target: {}
               icon: mdi:video-box
               name: Video 1
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 9
                 target: {}
               name: Video 2
               icon: mdi:video-box
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 13
                 target: {}
               name: Tape
               icon: mdi:cassette
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 14
                 target: {}
               icon: mdi:dolby
               name: 7.1 Direct

Commit message:

add note about level converter to doc, add link in main index

components/outlaw_990.rst, after:

Outlaw Audio 990 Surround Processor
===================================

This custom component will communicate with an Outlaw Audio 990 via
RS232 serial port (UART) to provide control and status feedback. You can
use the component in automations, or to create a basic remote control in
the Dashboard.

You will need to use an appropriate level converter connected to your
chosen UART pins on the ESP, e.g. MAX3232.  Take care in choosing one that
operates at 3.3V, as the ESP is not 5V tolerant.

ESPHome Configuration
---------------------

Required additions to your ESPHome ``yaml`` file below (set rx and tx
pins of the UART as needed):

::

   uart:
     rx_pin: GPIO14
     tx_pin: GPIO13
     baud_rate: 9600
     id: uart1

   outlaw_990:
     id: outlaw
     uart_id: uart1

   binary_sensor:
     - platform: outlaw_990
       sensor_power:
         name: "Outlaw Power Status"
       sensor_mute:
         name: "Outlaw Mute Status"

   sensor:
     - platform: outlaw_990
       sensor_volume:
         name: "Outlaw Volume Status"

   text_sensor:
     - platform: outlaw_990
       sensor_display:
         name: "Outlaw Display"
       sensor_audio_in:
         name: "Outlaw Audio Input"
       sensor_video_in:
         name: "Outlaw Video Input"

Sensors
-------

This component provides several sensors.

Binary Sensors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  ``sensor_power`` - Power Status (``true`` means ON)
-  ``sensor_mute`` - Mute Status (``true`` means MUTED)

.. _sensors-1:

Sensors
~~~~~~~

-  ``sensor_volume`` - Volume Level (-76 to +14 dB)

Text Sensors
~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  ``sensor_display`` - Text as displayed on face of unit
-  ``sensor_audio_in`` - Text label of current audio input
-  ``sensor_video_in`` - Text label of current video input
-  

Services
--------

``outlaw_power`` - Discrete Power On/Off
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This service will control the power of the unit, on or off, based on the
``power`` parameter supplied.

``outlaw_mute`` - Toggle Mute
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This service will toggle the current mute state. The native protocol
does not allow directly setting mute on or off. A future version may
provide a means to fake that functionality.

``outlaw_volume_adj`` - Adjust Volume
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This service will adjust the volume up or down by 1dB, controlled by the
supplied ``up`` parameter. The native protocol of the Outlaw does not
allow setting a specific volume level. A future version may provide a
means to fake that functionality.

``outlaw_cmd`` - Send Command
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This service will send a protocol control code specified in the ``cmd``
parameter to the unit. The full list of commands is in the `protocol
specification <http://outlawaudio.com/outlaw/docs/990rs232protocol.pdf>`__.
Note that the service expects a decimal value, so the hex values in the
document will need to be converted.

Think of this service as a means of virtually “pressing” remote control
buttons. That is the general paradigm of the Outlaw 990 serial protocol.

Example Dashboard Configuration
-------------------------------

The code for an example remote control Lovelace dashboard card is shown
below. Note that it uses the entity names as configured above. The card
is also conditional, and it will not be shown if the ESPHome device is
unavailable. Additional elements within the card are also conditional
based on whether the Outlaw is turned on.

Dashboard Example

Code for the dashboard example:

::

   type: conditional
   conditions:
     - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
       state_not: unavailable
   card:
     type: vertical-stack
     cards:
       - type: horizontal-stack
         cards:
           - show_name: true
             show_icon: true
             name: Power
             type: button
             tap_action:
               action: call-service
               service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_power
               data:
                 power: true
               target: {}
             entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
             icon_height: 32px
             hold_action:
               action: call-service
               service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_power
               data:
                 power: false
               target: {}
             icon: mdi:power
             show_state: true
           - type: conditional
             conditions:
               - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
                 state: 'on'
             card:
               show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               name: Mute
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_mute
                 data: {}
                 target: {}
               entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_mute_status
               icon_height: 32px
               icon: mdi:volume-off
               show_state: true
           - type: conditional
             conditions:
               - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
                 state: 'on'
             card:
               type: entity
               entity: sensor.outlaw_volume_status
               icon: mdi:volume-low
               name: Volume
       - type: conditional
         conditions:
           - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
             state: 'on'
         card:
           type: horizontal-stack
           cards:
             - show_name: false
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_volume_adj
                 data:
                   up: false
                 target: {}
               entity: ''
               icon: mdi:arrow-down-box
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_volume_adj
                 data:
                   up: true
                 target: {}
               entity: ''
               icon: mdi:arrow-up-box
       - type: markdown
         content: >
           # <center> {{ states('sensor.outlaw_display') + ' ' | replace(' ',
           '\u2800') }} </center>
         style:
           text-align: center
       - type: conditional
         conditions:
           - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
             state: 'on'
         card:
           type: horizontal-stack
           cards:
             - type: markdown
               content: |
                 <center> Audio In </center>

                 # <center> {{ states.sensor.outlaw_audio_input.state }} </center>
             - type: markdown
               content: |
                 <center> Video In </center>

                 # <center> {{ states.sensor.outlaw_video_input.state }} </center>
       - type: conditional
         conditions:
           - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
             state: 'on'
         card:
           type: horizontal-stack
           cards:
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 3
                 target: {}
               icon: mdi:radio
               name: Tuner
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 4
                 target: {}
               name: CD
               icon: mdi:disc-player
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 5
                 target: {}
               name: Aux/USB
               icon: mdi:usb
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 7
                 target: {}
               icon: mdi:disc-player
               name: DVD
       - type: conditional
         conditions:
           - entity: binary_sensor.outlaw_power_status
             state: 'on'
         card:
           type: horizontal-stack
           cards:
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 8
                 target: {}
               icon: mdi:video-box
               name: Video 1
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 9
                 target: {}
               name: Video 2
               icon: mdi:video-box
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 13
                 target: {}
               name: Tape
               icon: mdi:cassette
             - show_name: true
               show_icon: true
               type: button
               tap_action:
                 action: call-service
                 service: esphome.av_control_outlaw_command
                 data:
                   cmd: 14
                 target: {}
               icon: mdi:dolby
               name: 7.1 Direct
