PCA9554 I/O Expander
====================

The PCA9554 component allows you to use PCA9554, PCA9554A or PCA9536 I/O expanders
(`PCA9554 datasheet <https://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/pca9554.pdf>`__, 
`PCA9554A datasheet <https://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/pca9554a.pdf>`__, 
`PCA9536 datasheet <https://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/pca9536.pdf>`__) in ESPHome. 
It uses :ref:`I²C Bus <i2c>` for communication.

Once configured, you can use any of the 8 pins (PCA9554, PCA9554A) or 4 pins (PCA9536) as
pins for your projects. Within ESPHome they emulate a real internal GPIO pin
and can therefore be used with many of ESPHome's components such as the GPIO
binary sensor or GPIO switch.

The 7 bit I2C device address ranges are:

.. table:: I2C Device Address Table
   :widths: auto

+==========+===============+
| Device   | Address Range |
+==========+===============+
| PCA9554  | 0x20 to 0x27  |
+----------+---------------+
| PCA9554A | 0x38 to 0x3F  |
+----------+---------------+
| PCA9536  | 0x41          |
+----------+---------------+

For the PCA9554 and PCA9554A, the actual choice of the I2C device address depends on state of the 3 address pins.
Please refer to the individual datasheets for further details.

Up to eight PCA9554 and an additional eight PCA9554A devices can reside on the same I2C bus. 
Please note that only one PCA9536 device is allowed per I2C bus due to its fixed address.

The PCA9554 and PCA9554A provide 8 bits of GPIO's (pin numbers 0-7)
The PCA9536 provides 4 bits of GPIO's (pin numbers 0-3).

Any option accepting a :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>` can theoretically be used, but some more
complicated components that do communication through this I/O expander will
not work.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    pca9554:
      - id: 'pca9554a_device'
        address: 0x38
      

    # Individual outputs
    switch:
      - platform: gpio
        name: "PCF9554A Pin #0"
        pin:
          pca9554: pcf9554a_device
          # Use pin number 0
          number: 0
          # One of INPUT or OUTPUT
          mode:
            output: true
          inverted: false

Configuration variables:
************************

- **id** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id to use for this PCF9554 component.
- **address** (*Optional*, int): The I²C address of the driver.
  Defaults to ``0x20``.



Pin configuration variables:
****************************

- **pca9554** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the PCA9554 component of the pin.
- **number** (**Required**, int): The pin number.
- **inverted** (*Optional*, boolean): If all read and written values
  should be treated as inverted. Defaults to ``false``.
- **mode** (*Optional*, string): A pin mode to set for the pin at. One of ``INPUT`` or ``OUTPUT``.


See Also
--------

- :ref:`i2c`
- :doc:`switch/gpio`
- :doc:`binary_sensor/gpio`
- :apiref:`pca9554/pca9554.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
