components/sn74hc165.rst, before:

SN74HC165 I/O Expander (shift register)
=======================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up SN74HC165 shift registers as digital port expanders in ESPHome.

The SN74HC165 component allows you to use SN74HC165 shift registers as I/O expanders (Input only, use SN74HC595 for outputs)
(`datasheet <https://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/sn74hc165.pdf>`__) in ESPHome. It uses 3 wires (optionally 4) for communication.

Once configured, you can use any of the 8 pins for your projects. Up-to 256 shift registers can be daisy-chained
to provide more pins, without using more GPIO pins on the controller. They are linked by connecting pin Q of the closer
shift register to the pin QH of the next shift register.


.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sn74hc165:
      - id: sn74hc165_hub
        clock_pin: GPIO16
        data_pin: GPIO17
        load_pin: GPIO4
        clock_inhibit_pin: GPIO18
        sr_count: 2

    # Individual inputs
    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        name: "SN74HC165 Pin #0"
        pin:
          sn74hc165: sn74hc165_hub
          # Use pin number 0
          number: 0
          inverted: false


Configuration variables:
************************

- **id** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id to use for this SN74HC165 component.
- **data_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): Pin connected to SN74HC165 Serial Output (QH) input.
- **clock_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): Pin connected to SN74HC165 Clock (CLK) pin
- **load_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): Pin connected to SN74HC165 Load input (SH/LD) pin
- **clock_inhibit_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): Pin connected to SN74HC165 Clock Inhibit (CLK INH) pin
- **sr_count** (*Optional*, int): Number of daisy-chained shift registers, up-to 256. Defaults to ``1``.


Pin configuration variables:
****************************

- **SN74HC165** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the SN74HC165 component of the pin.
- **number** (**Required**, int): The pin number.
- **inverted** (*Optional*, boolean): If received value should be treated as inverted.
  Defaults to ``false``.

.. note::

    Pin number 0 is Pin A on the SN74HC165 that is furthest away from the microcontroller.

See Also
--------


- :doc:`binary_sensor/gpio`
- :apiref:`SN74HC165/SN74HC165.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Set SN74HC165's clock_inhibit_pin as optional
The use of only 3 pins is mentioned, but the configuration values don't reflect that.
Datasheet specifies the pin can be directly connected to ground. The code already expects the pin to not be used: https://github.com/esphome/esphome/blob/ec3162282cd5a2c3455dd7a8669b4f762c481a20/esphome/components/sn74hc165/__init__.py#L35

components/sn74hc165.rst, after:

SN74HC165 I/O Expander (shift register)
=======================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up SN74HC165 shift registers as digital port expanders in ESPHome.

The SN74HC165 component allows you to use SN74HC165 shift registers as I/O expanders (Input only, use SN74HC595 for outputs)
(`datasheet <https://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/sn74hc165.pdf>`__) in ESPHome. It uses 3 wires (optionally 4) for communication.

Once configured, you can use any of the 8 pins for your projects. Up-to 256 shift registers can be daisy-chained
to provide more pins, without using more GPIO pins on the controller. They are linked by connecting pin Q of the closer
shift register to the pin QH of the next shift register.

The use of CLK INH pin is optional, as it can be directly connected to ground.


.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sn74hc165:
      - id: sn74hc165_hub
        clock_pin: GPIO16
        data_pin: GPIO17
        load_pin: GPIO4
        clock_inhibit_pin: GPIO18
        sr_count: 2

    # Individual inputs
    binary_sensor:
      - platform: gpio
        name: "SN74HC165 Pin #0"
        pin:
          sn74hc165: sn74hc165_hub
          # Use pin number 0
          number: 0
          inverted: false


Configuration variables:
************************

- **id** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id to use for this SN74HC165 component.
- **data_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): Pin connected to SN74HC165 Serial Output (QH) input.
- **clock_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): Pin connected to SN74HC165 Clock (CLK) pin
- **load_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): Pin connected to SN74HC165 Load input (SH/LD) pin
- **clock_inhibit_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): Pin connected to SN74HC165 Clock Inhibit (CLK INH) pin
- **sr_count** (*Optional*, int): Number of daisy-chained shift registers, up-to 256. Defaults to ``1``.


Pin configuration variables:
****************************

- **SN74HC165** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The id of the SN74HC165 component of the pin.
- **number** (**Required**, int): The pin number.
- **inverted** (*Optional*, boolean): If received value should be treated as inverted.
  Defaults to ``false``.

.. note::

    Pin number 0 is Pin A on the SN74HC165 that is furthest away from the microcontroller.

See Also
--------


- :doc:`binary_sensor/gpio`
- :apiref:`SN74HC165/SN74HC165.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
