components/climate/haier.rst, before:

Haier Climate
=============

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up a Haier climate devices.
    :image: air-conditioner.svg

This is an implementation of the ESPHome component to control HVAC on the base of the SmartAir2 and hOn Haier protocols (AC that is controlled by the hOn or SmartAir2 application).

There are two versions of the Haier protocol. The older one is using an application called SmartAir2 and the newer one - an application called hOn. Both protocols are compatible on the transport level but have different commands to control appliances.

Older Haier models controlled by the SmartAir2 application are using the KZW-W002 module. This module can’t be reused, and you need to replace it with an ESP (RPI pico w) module. The USB connector on a board doesn’t support the USB protocol. It is a UART port that just uses a USB connector. To connect the ESP board to your AC you can cut a USB type A cable and connect wires to the climate connector.

.. list-table:: Haier UART pinout
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Board
      - USB
      - Wire color
      - ESP8266
    * - 5V
      - VCC
      - red
      - 5V
    * - GND
      - GND
      - black
      - GND
    * - TX
      - DATA+
      - green
      - RX
    * - RX
      - DATA-
      - white
      - TX

.. figure:: images/usb_pinout.png
    :align: center
    :width: 70.0%

    KZW-W002 module pinout

Newer Haier models using a module called ESP32-for-Haier. It is an ESP32 single-core board with an ESP32-S0WD chip. In some cases, you can reuse this module and flash it with ESPHome, but some new modules don’t support this. They look the same but have encryption enabled.

**Warning!** The new generation of ESP32-Haier devices has encryption enabled, so they can only be flashed with firmware that is signed with a private key. There is no way to make them work with ESPHome, so if you try to do it, the board will get into a boot loop with error ``rst:0x10 (RTCWDT_RTC_RESET),boot:0x13 (SPI_FAST_FLASH_BOOT)`` The only way to recover this board is to flash it with the original image. So before starting your experiments make a backup image.

.. figure:: images/haier_pinout.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 70.0%

    ESP32-for-Haier UART0 pinout

Also, you can use any other ESP32, ESP8266 or a RPI pico W board. In this case, you will need to cut the original wire or make a connector yourself (the board has a JST SM04B-GHS-TB connector)

This component requires a :ref:`uart` to be setup.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry

    uart:
      baud_rate: 9600
      tx_pin: 17
      rx_pin: 16
      id: ac_port  
    
    climate:
      - platform: haier
        id: haier_ac
        protocol: hOn
        name: Haier AC 
        uart_id: ac_port
        wifi_signal: true
        beeper: true
        display: true
        outdoor_temperature:
          name: Haier AC outdoor temperature
        visual:
          min_temperature: 16 °C
          max_temperature: 30 °C
          temperature_step: 1 °C
        supported_modes:
        - 'OFF'
        - HEAT_COOL
        - COOL
        - HEAT
        - DRY
        - FAN_ONLY
        supported_swing_modes:
        - 'OFF'
        - VERTICAL
        - HORIZONTAL
        - BOTH
    supported_presets:
      - ECO
      - BOOST
      - SLEEP


Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **uart_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): ID of the UART port to communicate with AC.
- **protocol** (*Optional*, string): Defines protocol of communication with AC. Possible values: hon or smartair2. Default value is smartair2.
- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the climate device.
- **wifi_signal** (*Optional*, boolean): If true - send wifi signal level to AC.
- **answer_timeout** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): Responce timeout. Default value is 150ms.
- **display** (*Optional*, boolean): Can be used to set AC display off.
- **beeper** (*Optional*, boolean): Can be used to disable beeping on commands from AC. Supported only by hOn protocol.
- **outdoor_temperature** (*Optional*): Temperature sensor for outdoor temperature. Supported only by hOn protocol.

  - **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the sensor.
  - **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): ID of the sensor, can be used for code generation
  - All other options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **supported_modes** (*Optional*, list): Can be used to disable some of AC modes. Possible values: 'OFF', HEAT_COOL, COOL, HEAT, DRY, FAN_ONLY
- **supported_swing_modes** (*Optional*, list): Can be used to disable some swing modes if your AC does not support it. Possible values: 'OFF', VERTICAL, HORIZONTAL, BOTH
- **supported_presets** (*Optional*, list): Can be used to disable some presets. Possible values for smartair2 are: BOOST, COMFORT. Possible values for hOn are: ECO, BOOST, SLEEP
- All other options from :ref:`Climate <config-climate>`.

Automations
-----------

climate.haier.power_on Action
*****************************

This action turns AC power on.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.power_on: device_id

climate.haier.power_off Action
******************************

This action turns AC power off

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.power_off: device_id

climate.haier.power_toggle Action
*********************************

This action toggles AC power

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.power_toggle: device_id

climate.haier.display_on Action
*******************************

This action turns the AC display on

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.display_on: device_id

climate.haier.display_off Action
********************************

This action turns the AC display off

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.display_off: device_id

climate.haier.health_on Action
******************************

Turn on health mode (`UV light sterilization <https://www.haierhvac.eu/en/node/1809>`__)

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.health_on: device_id

climate.haier.health_off Action
*******************************

Turn off health mode

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.health_off: device_id

climate.haier.beeper_on Action
******************************

(supported only by hOn) This action enables beep feedback on every command sent to AC

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.beeper_on: device_id

climate.haier.beeper_off Action
*******************************

(supported only by hOn) This action disables beep feedback on every command sent to AC (keep in mind that this will not work for IR remote commands)

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.beeper_off: device_id

climate.haier.set_vertical_airflow Action
*****************************************

(supported only by hOn) Set direction for vertical airflow if the vertical swing is disabled. Possible values: Health_Up, Max_Up, Up, Center, Down, Health_Down.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - climate.haier.set_vertical_airflow:
          id: device_id
          vertical_airflow: Up

climate.haier.set_horizontal_airflow Action
*******************************************

(supported only by hOn) Set direction for horizontal airflow if the horizontal swing is disabled. Possible values: Max_Left, Left, Center, Right, Max_Right.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - climate.haier.set_horizontal_airflow:
          id: device_id
          vertical_airflow: Right

climate.haier.start_self_cleaning Action
****************************************

(supported only by hOn) Start `self-cleaning <https://www.haier.com/in/blogs/beat-the-summer-heat-with-haier-self-cleaning-ac.shtml>`__

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - climate.haier.start_self_cleaning: device_id

climate.haier.start_steri_cleaning Action
*****************************************

(supported only by hOn) Start 56°C steri-cleaning

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - climate.haier.start_steri_cleaning: device_id

See Also
--------

- `haier-esphome <https://github.com/paveldn/haier-esphome>`__
- :doc:`/components/climate/index`
- :apiref:`haier/climate/haier.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Updated Haier documentation with new configuration values description (#3349)
Co-authored-by: Pavlo Dudnytskyi <pdudnytskyi@astrata.eu>

components/climate/haier.rst, after:

Haier Climate
=============

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up a Haier climate devices.
    :image: air-conditioner.svg

This is an implementation of the ESPHome component to control HVAC on the base of the SmartAir2 and hOn Haier protocols (AC that is controlled by the hOn or SmartAir2 application).

There are two versions of the Haier protocol. The older one is using an application called SmartAir2 and the newer one - an application called hOn. Both protocols are compatible on the transport level but have different commands to control appliances.

Older Haier models controlled by the SmartAir2 application are using the KZW-W002 module. This module can’t be reused, and you need to replace it with an ESP (RPI pico w) module. The USB connector on a board doesn’t support the USB protocol. It is a UART port that just uses a USB connector. To connect the ESP board to your AC you can cut a USB type A cable and connect wires to the climate connector.

.. list-table:: Haier UART pinout
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Board
      - USB
      - Wire color
      - ESP8266
    * - 5V
      - VCC
      - red
      - 5V
    * - GND
      - GND
      - black
      - GND
    * - TX
      - DATA+
      - green
      - RX
    * - RX
      - DATA-
      - white
      - TX

.. figure:: images/usb_pinout.png
    :align: center
    :width: 70.0%

    KZW-W002 module pinout

Newer Haier models using a module called ESP32-for-Haier. It is an ESP32 single-core board with an ESP32-S0WD chip. In some cases, you can reuse this module and flash it with ESPHome, but some new modules don’t support this. They look the same but have encryption enabled.

**Warning!** The new generation of ESP32-Haier devices has encryption enabled, so they can only be flashed with firmware that is signed with a private key. There is no way to make them work with ESPHome, so if you try to do it, the board will get into a boot loop with error ``rst:0x10 (RTCWDT_RTC_RESET),boot:0x13 (SPI_FAST_FLASH_BOOT)`` The only way to recover this board is to flash it with the original image. So before starting your experiments make a backup image.

.. figure:: images/haier_pinout.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 70.0%

    ESP32-for-Haier UART0 pinout

Also, you can use any other ESP32, ESP8266 or a RPI pico W board. In this case, you will need to cut the original wire or make a connector yourself (the board has a JST SM04B-GHS-TB connector)

This component requires a :ref:`uart` to be setup.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry

    uart:
      baud_rate: 9600
      tx_pin: 17
      rx_pin: 16
      id: ac_port  
    
    climate:
      - platform: haier
        id: haier_ac
        protocol: hOn
        name: Haier AC 
        uart_id: ac_port
        wifi_signal: true
        beeper: true
        display: true
        outdoor_temperature:
          name: Haier AC outdoor temperature
        visual:
          min_temperature: 16 °C
          max_temperature: 30 °C
          temperature_step: 1 °C
        supported_modes:
        - 'OFF'
        - HEAT_COOL
        - COOL
        - HEAT
        - DRY
        - FAN_ONLY
        supported_swing_modes:
        - 'OFF'
        - VERTICAL
        - HORIZONTAL
        - BOTH
    supported_presets:
      - ECO
      - BOOST
      - SLEEP


Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **uart_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): ID of the UART port to communicate with AC.
- **protocol** (*Optional*, string): Defines protocol of communication with AC. Possible values: hon or smartair2. Default value is smartair2.
- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the climate device.
- **wifi_signal** (*Optional*, boolean): If true - send wifi signal level to AC.
- **answer_timeout** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): Responce timeout. Default value is 200ms.
- **alternative_swing_control** (*Optional*, boolean): (supported by smartAir2 only) If true - use alternative values to control swing mode. Use only if the original control method is not working for your AC.
- **control_packet_size** (*Optional*, int): (supported only by hOn) Define the size of the control packet. Can help with some newer models of ACs that use bigger packets. Default value: 10.
- **control_method** (*Optional*, list): (supported only by hOn) Defines control method (should be supported by AC). Supported values: MONITOR_ONLY - no control, just monitor status, SET_GROUP_PARAMETERS - set all AC parameters with one command (default method), SET_SINGLE_PARAMETER - set each parameter individually (this method is supported by some new ceiling ACs like AD71S2SM3FA)
- **display** (*Optional*, boolean): Can be used to set AC display off.
- **beeper** (*Optional*, boolean): Can be used to disable beeping on commands from AC. Supported only by hOn protocol.
- **outdoor_temperature** (*Optional*): Temperature sensor for outdoor temperature. Supported only by hOn protocol.

  - **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the sensor.
  - **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): ID of the sensor, can be used for code generation
  - All other options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **supported_modes** (*Optional*, list): Can be used to disable some of AC modes. Possible values: 'OFF', HEAT_COOL, COOL, HEAT, DRY, FAN_ONLY
- **supported_swing_modes** (*Optional*, list): Can be used to disable some swing modes if your AC does not support it. Possible values: 'OFF', VERTICAL, HORIZONTAL, BOTH
- **supported_presets** (*Optional*, list): Can be used to disable some presets. Possible values for smartair2 are: BOOST, COMFORT. Possible values for hOn are: ECO, BOOST, SLEEP
- All other options from :ref:`Climate <config-climate>`.

Automations
-----------

climate.haier.power_on Action
*****************************

This action turns AC power on.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.power_on: device_id

climate.haier.power_off Action
******************************

This action turns AC power off

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.power_off: device_id

climate.haier.power_toggle Action
*********************************

This action toggles AC power

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.power_toggle: device_id

climate.haier.display_on Action
*******************************

This action turns the AC display on

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.display_on: device_id

climate.haier.display_off Action
********************************

This action turns the AC display off

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.display_off: device_id

climate.haier.health_on Action
******************************

Turn on health mode (`UV light sterilization <https://www.haierhvac.eu/en/node/1809>`__)

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.health_on: device_id

climate.haier.health_off Action
*******************************

Turn off health mode

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.health_off: device_id

climate.haier.beeper_on Action
******************************

(supported only by hOn) This action enables beep feedback on every command sent to AC

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.beeper_on: device_id

climate.haier.beeper_off Action
*******************************

(supported only by hOn) This action disables beep feedback on every command sent to AC (keep in mind that this will not work for IR remote commands)

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        climate.haier.beeper_off: device_id

climate.haier.set_vertical_airflow Action
*****************************************

(supported only by hOn) Set direction for vertical airflow if the vertical swing is disabled. Possible values: Health_Up, Max_Up, Up, Center, Down, Health_Down.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - climate.haier.set_vertical_airflow:
          id: device_id
          vertical_airflow: Up

climate.haier.set_horizontal_airflow Action
*******************************************

(supported only by hOn) Set direction for horizontal airflow if the horizontal swing is disabled. Possible values: Max_Left, Left, Center, Right, Max_Right.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - climate.haier.set_horizontal_airflow:
          id: device_id
          vertical_airflow: Right

climate.haier.start_self_cleaning Action
****************************************

(supported only by hOn) Start `self-cleaning <https://www.haier.com/in/blogs/beat-the-summer-heat-with-haier-self-cleaning-ac.shtml>`__

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - climate.haier.start_self_cleaning: device_id

climate.haier.start_steri_cleaning Action
*****************************************

(supported only by hOn) Start 56°C steri-cleaning

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      then:
        - climate.haier.start_steri_cleaning: device_id

See Also
--------

- `haier-esphome <https://github.com/paveldn/haier-esphome>`__
- :doc:`/components/climate/index`
- :apiref:`haier/climate/haier.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
