ADE7880 Power Sensor
====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up ADE7880 energy metering sensors
    :keywords: ADE7880, Shelly 3EM

The ``ade7880`` sensor platform allows you to use ADE7880
voltage/current/power sensors (`datasheet`_) with ESPHome. This sensor
chip is commonly found in Shelly 3EM and 3EM Pro devices.

Communication with the chip is over an :ref:`I2C bus <i2c>`, so
you need to have an ``i2c:`` entry in your configuration with both
``sda`` and ``scl`` set. It is also recommended to set the I2C
``frequency`` to ``200kHz`` or higher, if the board containing the
chip can support it (this speed has been verified to work in the
Shelly 3EM). While this is not necessary, if a significant number of
the ``ade7880`` individual sensors (e.g. more than six) are enabled,
the time consumed by the I2C transactions can be substantial and
result in warning messages in the ESPHome logs.

The ADE7880 chip can measure up to three power phases, along with a
neutral. Current can be measured on all four inputs, while voltage and
power can be measured on the power phases. Current is measured using
CT clamps.

While the chip is designed for 3-phase AC power, the phase inputs are
independent of each other, so the chip can be used with single-phase
and two-phase AC power circuits as well (or a mixture of them).

Instantaneous vs. Accumulated Sensors
-------------------------------------

The digital signal processor (DSP) in the ADE7880 executes its
computations 8,000 times per second. As a result, each sensor listed
below as 'instantaneous' reports the computed value from the most
recent DSP cycle; it does not report an average over the time period
since the last update.

Each sensor listed as 'accumulated' below reports the sum of all
computed values since the last update.

The update interval defaults to 60 seconds, but can be lowered if you
wish to have more frequent readings; this will increase the load (and
database growth) of the connected Home Assistant correspondingly.

Configuration Variables
-----------------------

- **irq1_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`):
  The GPIO pin that the ADE7880's IRQ1 output is connected to. The
  ``ade7880`` component uses this input to determine when the ADE7880
  chip has completed its power-up and reset cycles.

- **irq0_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`):
  The GPIO pin that the ADE7880's IRQ0 output is connected to, if
  any. The ``ade7880`` component does not use this input, but if the
  IRQ0 output is connected to a GPIO and that GPIO is *not* configured
  as an ``input``, the chip will produce excessive heat and its
  lifetime could be shortened. The simplest way to ensure that the
  GPIO pin is properly connected is to supply it here, but if you wish
  to configure it elsewhere in your configuration that is a reasonable
  alternative.

- **reset_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`):
  The GPIO pin that the ADE7880's RESET input is connected to, if
  any. If this pin is configured, the ``ade7880`` component will use
  it to initiate a 'hardware reset' of the chip when needed; if this
  pin is not configured, the component will attempt to initiate a
  'software reset' of the chip when needed, but this could fail if the
  chip is not responding properly to the I2C bus.

- **frequency** (*Optional*, string): The AC line frequency of the
  supply voltage. The supported range is ``45Hz`` to
  ``65Hz``. Defaults to ``50Hz``.

- **phase_a** (*Optional*): The configuration variables for the 'A'
  phase inputs of the chip. Refer to the configuration examples below
  for the `simple` and `detailed` sensor configuration options.

  - **name** (*Optional*, string): The name of the phase, which will
    be used a prefix in the names of all of the phase's sensors.

  - **voltage** (instantaneous) (*Optional*): Report the RMS voltage
    value of this phase in volts (V). In detailed configuration mode,
    all options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>` are supported.

  - **current** (instantaneous) (*Optional*): Report the RMS current
    value of this phase in amperes (A). In detailed configuration
    mode, all options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>` are
    supported.

  - **active_power** (instantaneous) (*Optional*): Report the active
    (consumed) power value of this phase in watts (W). In detailed
    configuration mode, all options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
    are supported.

  - **apparent_power** (instantaneous) (*Optional*): Report the
    apparent (voltage multiplied by current) power value of this phase
    in volt-amperes (VA). In detailed configuration mode, all options
    from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>` are supported.

  - **power_factor** (instantaneous) (*Optional*): Report the power
    factor value of this phase as a percentage (%). In detailed
    configuration mode, all options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
    are supported.

  - **forward_active_energy** (accumulated) (*Optional*): Report the
    forward active energy value of this phase in watt-hours (Wh). In
    detailed configuration mode, all options from :ref:`Sensor
    <config-sensor>` are supported.

  - **reverse_active_energy** (accumulated) (*Optional*): Report the
    reverse active energy value of this phase in
    volt-ampere-reactive-hours (VARh). In detailed configuration mode,
    all options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>` are supported.

  - **calibration** (**Required**): The calibration values necessary
    for this phase's sensors to report correct values.

    - **current_gain** (**Required**, integer): The value for the
      ``AIGAIN`` calibration register.

    - **voltage_gain** (**Required**, integer): The value for the
      ``AVGAIN`` calibration register.

    - **power_gain** (**Required**, integer): The value for the
      ``APGAIN`` calibration register.

    - **phase_angle** (**Required**, integer): The value for the
      ``APHCAL`` calibration register.

- **phase_b** (*Optional*): The configuration variables for the 'B'
  phase inputs of the chip. Identical to ``phase_a``.

- **phase_c** (*Optional*): The configuration variables for the 'C'
  phase inputs of the chip. Identical to ``phase_a``.

- **neutral** (*Optional*): The configuration variables for the
  'neutral' phase of the chip.

  - **name** (*Optional*, string): The name of the phase, which will
    be used a prefix in the names of all of the phase's sensors.

  - **current** (instantaneous) (**Required**): Report the RMS current
    value of the neutral in amperes (A). In detailed configuration
    mode, all options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>` are
    supported.

  - **calibration** (**Required**): The calibration values necessary
    for this phase's sensors to report correct values.

    - **current_gain** (**Required**, integer): The value for the
      ``NIGAIN`` calibration register.

- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval
  to report the sensor values. Defaults to ``60s``.

- **i2c_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Specify the ID of the
  :ref:`I2C Component <i2c>` if your configuration includes multiple
  I2C buses.

Calibration
-----------

These sensors needs calibration to report correct values. For the
Shelly 3EM and 3EM Pro devices, the calibration is performed during
manufacturing, and the calibration data is included in the firmware
stored in the device. See the `Shelly 3EM`_ section of the ESPHome
Devices site for details on how to obtain the calibration data for a
3EM device.

Configuration Examples
----------------------

There are two sensor configuration modes supported: *simple* and
*detailed*. The mode can be chosen for each sensor indepedently from
all other sensors.

The *simple* mode is useful when you have no need to provide IDs for
sensors, or to override any of the default sensor settings (unit of
measurement, device class, state class, decimal accuracy). The value
provided for each sensor variable will be the sensor's name
(optionally prefixed with the phase name, if it has been
configured).

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example simple sensor configuration mode
    sensor:
      - platform: ade7880
        irq0_pin:
          number: GPIOXX
        irq1_pin:
          number: GPIOXX
        phase_a:
          name: Room Heater
          voltage: Voltage
          current: Current
          active_power: Active Power
          power_factor: Power Factor
          forward_active_energy: Forward Active Energy
          reverse_active_energy: Reverse Active Energy
          calibration:
            current_gain: 3116628
            voltage_gain: -757178
            power_gain: -1344457
            phase_angle: 188

Because the phase name 'Room Heater' was configured, the resulting
names for the various sensors will be 'Room Heater Voltage', 'Room
Heater Current', etc.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example detailed sensor configuration mode
    sensor:
      - platform: ade7880
        irq0_pin:
          number: GPIOXX
        irq1_pin:
          number: GPIOXX
        phase_a:
          voltage: Voltage
          current:
            name: Current
            accuracy_decimals: 0
          active_power: Active Power
          power_factor:
            id: ade_power_factor
            name: Power Factor
          forward_active_energy: Forward Active Energy
          reverse_active_energy: Reverse Active Energy
          calibration:
            current_gain: 3116628
            voltage_gain: -757178
            power_gain: -1344457
            phase_angle: 188

In this example, the ``accuracy_decimals`` variable for the
``current`` sensor has been specified (overriding the default), and an
``ID`` has been specified for the ``power_factor`` sensor. The
remaining sensors for the 'A' phase are configured using 'simple'
configuration mode.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example full platform configuration
    sensor:
      - platform: ade7880
        irq0_pin:
          number: GPIOXX
        irq1_pin:
          number: GPIOXX
        reset_pin:
          number: GPIOXX
        frequency: 60Hz
        phase_a:
          name: Phase A
          voltage: Voltage
          current: Current
          active_power: Active Power
          power_factor: Power Factor
          forward_active_energy: Forward Active Energy
          reverse_active_energy: Reverse Active Energy
          calibration:
            current_gain: 3116628
            voltage_gain: -757178
            power_gain: -1344457
            phase_angle: 188
        phase_b:
          name: Phase B
          voltage: Voltage
          current: Current
          active_power:: Active Power
          power_factor: Power Factor
          forward_active_energy: Forward Active Energy
          reverse_active_energy: Reverse Active Energy
          calibration:
            current_gain: 3133655
            voltage_gain: -755235
            power_gain: -1345638
            phase_angle: 188
        phase_c:
          name: Phase C
          voltage: Voltage
          current: Current
          active_power: Active Power
          power_factor: Power Factor
          forward_active_energy: Forward Active Energy
          reverse_active_energy: Reverse Active Energy
          calibration:
            current_gain: 3111158
            voltage_gain: -743813
            power_gain: -1351437
            phase_angle: 180
        neutral:
          name: Test 3 Unused
          current: Current
          calibration:
            current_gain: 3011156

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :apiref:`ade7880/ade7880.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

.. _datasheet: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/ADE7880.pdf
.. _`Shelly 3EM`: https://devices.esphome.io/devices/Shelly-3EM
