components/sensor/ade7953.rst, before:

ADE7953 Power Sensor
====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up ADE7953 power sensors
    :image: ade7953.svg

.. note::

    This page is incomplete and could use some work. If you want to contribute, please read the
    :doc:`contributing guide </guides/contributing>`. This page is missing:

      - A complete configuration example for the Shelly 2.5
      - An image for the front page

The ``ade7953`` sensor platform allows you to use ADE7953 single phase energy metering ICs
(`datasheet <https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/ADE7953.pdf>`__)
with ESPHome. These are commonly found in **Shelly** devices.

This sensor can measure voltage and has two channels for reading current and active power (A & B).

.. note::

    SAFETY HAZARD: Some devices such as Sonoff POWs/Shelly/etc, have the digital GND connected directly to mains voltage so **the GPIOs become LIVE during normal operation**. Our advice is to mark these boards to prevent any use of the dangerous digital pins.

The :ref:`I²C Bus <i2c>`
or :ref:`SPI Bus <spi>`
is required to be set up in your configuration for this sensor to work.

Over I²C
--------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry for i2c
    sensor:
      - platform: ade7953_i2c
        irq_pin: GPIO16
        voltage:
          name: ADE7953 Voltage
        frequency:
          name: ADE7953 Frequency
        current_a:
          name: ADE7953 Current A
        current_b:
          name: ADE7953 Current B
        power_factor_a:
          name: "ADE7953 Power Factor A"
        power_factor_b:
          name: "ADE7953 Power Factor B"
        apparent_power_a:
          name: "ADE7953 Apparent Power A"
        apparent_power_b:
          name: "ADE7953 Apparent Power B"
        active_power_a:
          name: ADE7953 Active Power A
        active_power_b:
          name: ADE7953 Active Power B
        reactive_power_a:
          name: "ADE7953 Reactive Power A"
        reactive_power_b:
          name: "ADE7953 Reactive Power B"

Configuration variables:
************************

- **address** (*Optional*, int): Manually specify the I²C address of the sensor. Defaults to ``0x38``.
- **irq_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin connected to the ADE7935 IRQ line (if connected)
- **voltage** (*Optional*): Use the voltage value of the sensor in volts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **frequency** (*Optional*): Use the frequency value of the sensor in hertzs. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **current_a** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the A channel in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **current_b** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the B channel in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power_factor_a** (*Optional*): Use the power factor of the A channel in percentage. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power_factor_b** (*Optional*): Use the power factor of the B channel in percentage. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **aparent_power_a** (*Optional*): Use the apparent power value of the A channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **aparent_power_b** (*Optional*): Use the apparent power value of the B channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **active_power_a** (*Optional*): Use the power value of the A channel in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **active_power_b** (*Optional*): Use the power value of the B channel in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **reactive_power_a** (*Optional*): Use the rective power value of the A channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **reactive_power_b** (*Optional*): Use the rective power value of the B channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **voltage_pga_gain** (*Optional*, mapping): Set the input PGA voltage amplification. Defaults to ``1x``. Possible values are:

  - ``1x``
  - ``2x``
  - ``4x``
  - ``8x``
  - ``16x``
  - ``22x``

- **current_pga_gain_a** (*Optional*, mapping): Set the input PGA current amplification of the A channel. Defaults to ``1x``. Possible values are:

  - ``1x``
  - ``2x``
  - ``4x``
  - ``8x``
  - ``16x``
  - ``22x``

- **current_pga_gain_b** (*Optional*, mapping): Set input PGA current amplification of the B channel. Defaults to ``1x``. Possible values are:

  - ``1x``
  - ``2x``
  - ``4x``
  - ``8x``
  - ``16x``

- **voltage_gain** (*Optional*, int): Set the voltage amplification. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **current_gain_a** (*Optional*, int): Set the current amplification of the A channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **current_gain_b** (*Optional*, int): Set the current amplification of the B channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **active_power_gain_a** (*Optional*, int): Set the active power amplification of the A channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **active_power_gain_b** (*Optional*, int): Set the active power amplification of the B channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.

Over SPI
--------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry for SPI (taken from a Shelly Pro 4PM)
    sensor:
      - platform: ade7953_spi
        cs_pin: GPIO04
        irq_pin: GPIO35
        current_pga_gain_a: 2x
        current_pga_gain_b: 2x
        current_gain_a: 0x600000
        current_gain_b: 0x600000
        voltage:
          name: "Voltage"
          filters:
          - delta: 1
        frequency:
          name: ADE7953 Frequency
          filters:
          - delta: 0.1
        current_a:
          name: "Current A"
          filters:
          - delta: 0.01
        current_b:
          name: "Current B"
          filters:
          - delta: 0.01
        power_factor_a:
          name: "Power Factor A"
          filters:
          - delta: 5
        power_factor_b:
          name: "ADE7953 Power Factor B"
          filters:
          - delta: 5
        apparent_power_a:
          name: "Apparent Power A"
          filters:
          - delta: 1
        apparent_power_b:
          name: "Apparent Power B"
          filters:
          - delta: 1
        active_power_a:
          name: "Power A"
          id: active_power_1
          # active_power is inverted, so multiply by -1
          filters:
          - multiply: -1
          - delta: 1
        active_power_b:
          name: "Power B"
          id: active_power_2
          # active_power is inverted, so multiply by -1
          filters:
          - multiply: -1
          - delta: 1
        reactive_power_a:
          name: "Reactive Power A"
          filters:
          - delta: 1
        reactive_power_b:
          name: "Reactive Power B"
          filters:
          - delta: 1

Configuration variables:
************************

- **cs_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The chip select pin.
- **irq_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin connected to the ADE7935 IRQ line (if connected)
- **voltage** (*Optional*): Use the voltage value of the sensor in volts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **frequency** (*Optional*): Use the frequency value of the sensor in hertzs. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **current_a** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the A channel in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **current_b** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the B channel in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power_factor_a** (*Optional*): Use the power factor of the A channel in percentage. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power_factor_b** (*Optional*): Use the power factor of the B channel in percentage. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **aparent_power_a** (*Optional*): Use the apparent power value of the A channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **aparent_power_b** (*Optional*): Use the apparent power value of the B channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **active_power_a** (*Optional*): Use the power value of the A channel in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **active_power_b** (*Optional*): Use the power value of the B channel in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **reactive_power_a** (*Optional*): Use the rective power value of the A channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **reactive_power_b** (*Optional*): Use the rective power value of the B channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **voltage_pga_gain** (*Optional*, mapping): Set the input PGA voltage amplification. Defaults to ``1x``. Possible values are:

  - ``1x``
  - ``2x``
  - ``4x``
  - ``8x``
  - ``16x``
  - ``22x``

- **current_pga_gain_a** (*Optional*, mapping): Set the input PGA current amplification of the A channel. Defaults to ``1x``. Possible values are:

  - ``1x``
  - ``2x``
  - ``4x``
  - ``8x``
  - ``16x``
  - ``22x``

- **current_pga_gain_b** (*Optional*, mapping): Set input PGA current amplification of the B channel. Defaults to ``1x``. Possible values are:

  - ``1x``
  - ``2x``
  - ``4x``
  - ``8x``
  - ``16x``

- **voltage_gain** (*Optional*, int): Set the voltage amplification. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **current_gain_a** (*Optional*, int): Set the current amplification of the A channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **current_gain_b** (*Optional*, int): Set the current amplification of the B channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **active_power_gain_a** (*Optional*, int): Set the active power amplification of the A channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **active_power_gain_b** (*Optional*, int): Set the active power amplification of the B channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.

Use with Shelly 2.5
-------------------

The Shelly 2.5 device contains this sensor for power monitoring. An example config for the Shelly 2.5
is given below.

There are three oddities with the Shelly 2.5:

- First, the A and B channels are mixed up - the chip's A channel is label B on the outside and
  vice versa. Probably to make the PCB easier to manufacture.
- Secondly, due to the first point the active_power values are inverted. This is fixed by
  using a multiply filter as seen in the config below.
- Lastly, the ADE7953 IRQ line is connected to the GPIO16. The irq_pin MUST be set to GPIO16 to prevent device overheat (>70ºC idling).

Additionally, the device has an ::doc:`NTC temperature sensor <ntc>`.

.. code-block:: yaml

    i2c:
      sda: GPIO12
      scl: GPIO14

    sensor:
      - platform: ade7953_i2c
        irq_pin: GPIO16
        voltage:
          name: Shelly Voltage
        current_a:
          name: Shelly Current B
        current_b:
          name: Shelly Current A
        active_power_a:
          name: Shelly Active Power B
          filters:
            - multiply: -1
        active_power_b:
          name: Shelly Active Power A
          filters:
            - multiply: -1
        update_interval: 60s

      # NTC Temperature
      - platform: ntc
        sensor: temp_resistance_reading
        name: "Shelly Temperature"
        calibration:
          b_constant: 3350
          reference_resistance: 10kOhm
          reference_temperature: 298.15K
      - platform: resistance
        id: temp_resistance_reading
        sensor: temp_analog_reading
        configuration: DOWNSTREAM
        resistor: 32kOhm
      - platform: adc
        id: temp_analog_reading
        pin: A0

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :apiref:`ade7953/ade7953.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

ADE7953: Add the ability to use accumulating energy registers, more precise power reporting

components/sensor/ade7953.rst, after:

ADE7953 Power Sensor
====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up ADE7953 power sensors
    :image: ade7953.svg

.. note::

    This page is incomplete and could use some work. If you want to contribute, please read the
    :doc:`contributing guide </guides/contributing>`. This page is missing:

      - A complete configuration example for the Shelly 2.5
      - An image for the front page

The ``ade7953`` sensor platform allows you to use ADE7953 single phase energy metering ICs
(`datasheet <https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/ADE7953.pdf>`__)
with ESPHome. These are commonly found in **Shelly** devices.

This sensor can measure voltage and has two channels for reading current and active power (A & B).

.. note::

    SAFETY HAZARD: Some devices such as Sonoff POWs/Shelly/etc, have the digital GND connected directly to mains voltage so **the GPIOs become LIVE during normal operation**. Our advice is to mark these boards to prevent any use of the dangerous digital pins.

The :ref:`I²C Bus <i2c>`
or :ref:`SPI Bus <spi>`
is required to be set up in your configuration for this sensor to work.

Over I²C
--------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry for i2c
    sensor:
      - platform: ade7953_i2c
        irq_pin: GPIO16
        voltage:
          name: ADE7953 Voltage
        frequency:
          name: ADE7953 Frequency
        current_a:
          name: ADE7953 Current A
        current_b:
          name: ADE7953 Current B
        power_factor_a:
          name: "ADE7953 Power Factor A"
        power_factor_b:
          name: "ADE7953 Power Factor B"
        apparent_power_a:
          name: "ADE7953 Apparent Power A"
        apparent_power_b:
          name: "ADE7953 Apparent Power B"
        active_power_a:
          name: ADE7953 Active Power A
        active_power_b:
          name: ADE7953 Active Power B
        reactive_power_a:
          name: "ADE7953 Reactive Power A"
        reactive_power_b:
          name: "ADE7953 Reactive Power B"

Configuration variables:
************************

- **address** (*Optional*, int): Manually specify the I²C address of the sensor. Defaults to ``0x38``.
- **irq_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin connected to the ADE7935 IRQ line (if connected)
- **voltage** (*Optional*): Use the voltage value of the sensor in volts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **frequency** (*Optional*): Use the frequency value of the sensor in hertzs. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **current_a** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the A channel in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **current_b** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the B channel in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power_factor_a** (*Optional*): Use the power factor of the A channel in percentage. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power_factor_b** (*Optional*): Use the power factor of the B channel in percentage. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **aparent_power_a** (*Optional*): Use the apparent power value of the A channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **aparent_power_b** (*Optional*): Use the apparent power value of the B channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **active_power_a** (*Optional*): Use the power value of the A channel in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **active_power_b** (*Optional*): Use the power value of the B channel in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **reactive_power_a** (*Optional*): Use the rective power value of the A channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **reactive_power_b** (*Optional*): Use the rective power value of the B channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **voltage_pga_gain** (*Optional*, mapping): Set the input PGA voltage amplification. Defaults to ``1x``. Possible values are:

  - ``1x``
  - ``2x``
  - ``4x``
  - ``8x``
  - ``16x``
  - ``22x``

- **current_pga_gain_a** (*Optional*, mapping): Set the input PGA current amplification of the A channel. Defaults to ``1x``. Possible values are:

  - ``1x``
  - ``2x``
  - ``4x``
  - ``8x``
  - ``16x``
  - ``22x``

- **current_pga_gain_b** (*Optional*, mapping): Set input PGA current amplification of the B channel. Defaults to ``1x``. Possible values are:

  - ``1x``
  - ``2x``
  - ``4x``
  - ``8x``
  - ``16x``

- **voltage_gain** (*Optional*, int): Set the voltage amplification. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **current_gain_a** (*Optional*, int): Set the current amplification of the A channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **current_gain_b** (*Optional*, int): Set the current amplification of the B channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **active_power_gain_a** (*Optional*, int): Set the active power amplification of the A channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **active_power_gain_b** (*Optional*, int): Set the active power amplification of the B channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.
- **use_accumulated_energy_registers** (*Optional*, boolean): Use ADE7935 accumulated energy registers instead of instant power registers. These registers store the accumulated energy since the last read and should provide better accuracy for power calculation. Defaults to ``false``.

Over SPI
--------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry for SPI (taken from a Shelly Pro 4PM)
    sensor:
      - platform: ade7953_spi
        cs_pin: GPIO04
        irq_pin: GPIO35
        current_pga_gain_a: 2x
        current_pga_gain_b: 2x
        current_gain_a: 0x600000
        current_gain_b: 0x600000
        voltage:
          name: "Voltage"
          filters:
          - delta: 1
        frequency:
          name: ADE7953 Frequency
          filters:
          - delta: 0.1
        current_a:
          name: "Current A"
          filters:
          - delta: 0.01
        current_b:
          name: "Current B"
          filters:
          - delta: 0.01
        power_factor_a:
          name: "Power Factor A"
          filters:
          - delta: 5
        power_factor_b:
          name: "ADE7953 Power Factor B"
          filters:
          - delta: 5
        apparent_power_a:
          name: "Apparent Power A"
          filters:
          - delta: 1
        apparent_power_b:
          name: "Apparent Power B"
          filters:
          - delta: 1
        active_power_a:
          name: "Power A"
          id: active_power_1
          # active_power is inverted, so multiply by -1
          filters:
          - multiply: -1
          - delta: 1
        active_power_b:
          name: "Power B"
          id: active_power_2
          # active_power is inverted, so multiply by -1
          filters:
          - multiply: -1
          - delta: 1
        reactive_power_a:
          name: "Reactive Power A"
          filters:
          - delta: 1
        reactive_power_b:
          name: "Reactive Power B"
          filters:
          - delta: 1

Configuration variables:
************************

- **cs_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The chip select pin.
- **irq_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin connected to the ADE7935 IRQ line (if connected)
- **voltage** (*Optional*): Use the voltage value of the sensor in volts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **frequency** (*Optional*): Use the frequency value of the sensor in hertzs. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **current_a** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the A channel in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **current_b** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the B channel in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power_factor_a** (*Optional*): Use the power factor of the A channel in percentage. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power_factor_b** (*Optional*): Use the power factor of the B channel in percentage. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **aparent_power_a** (*Optional*): Use the apparent power value of the A channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **aparent_power_b** (*Optional*): Use the apparent power value of the B channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **active_power_a** (*Optional*): Use the power value of the A channel in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **active_power_b** (*Optional*): Use the power value of the B channel in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **reactive_power_a** (*Optional*): Use the rective power value of the A channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **reactive_power_b** (*Optional*): Use the rective power value of the B channel in volt ampers. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **voltage_pga_gain** (*Optional*, mapping): Set the input PGA voltage amplification. Defaults to ``1x``. Possible values are:

  - ``1x``
  - ``2x``
  - ``4x``
  - ``8x``
  - ``16x``
  - ``22x``

- **current_pga_gain_a** (*Optional*, mapping): Set the input PGA current amplification of the A channel. Defaults to ``1x``. Possible values are:

  - ``1x``
  - ``2x``
  - ``4x``
  - ``8x``
  - ``16x``
  - ``22x``

- **current_pga_gain_b** (*Optional*, mapping): Set input PGA current amplification of the B channel. Defaults to ``1x``. Possible values are:

  - ``1x``
  - ``2x``
  - ``4x``
  - ``8x``
  - ``16x``

- **voltage_gain** (*Optional*, int): Set the voltage amplification. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **current_gain_a** (*Optional*, int): Set the current amplification of the A channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **current_gain_b** (*Optional*, int): Set the current amplification of the B channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **active_power_gain_a** (*Optional*, int): Set the active power amplification of the A channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **active_power_gain_b** (*Optional*, int): Set the active power amplification of the B channel. Defaults to ``0x400000``.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.
- **use_accumulated_energy_registers** (*Optional*, boolean): Use ADE7935 accumulated energy registers instead of instant power registers. These registers store the accumulated energy since the last read and should provide better accuracy for power calculation. Defaults to ``false``.

Use with Shelly 2.5
-------------------

The Shelly 2.5 device contains this sensor for power monitoring. An example config for the Shelly 2.5
is given below.

There are three oddities with the Shelly 2.5:

- First, the A and B channels are mixed up - the chip's A channel is label B on the outside and
  vice versa. Probably to make the PCB easier to manufacture.
- Secondly, due to the first point the active_power values are inverted. This is fixed by
  using a multiply filter as seen in the config below.
- Lastly, the ADE7953 IRQ line is connected to the GPIO16. The irq_pin MUST be set to GPIO16 to prevent device overheat (>70ºC idling).

Additionally, the device has an ::doc:`NTC temperature sensor <ntc>`.

.. code-block:: yaml

    i2c:
      sda: GPIO12
      scl: GPIO14

    sensor:
      - platform: ade7953_i2c
        irq_pin: GPIO16
        voltage:
          name: Shelly Voltage
        current_a:
          name: Shelly Current B
        current_b:
          name: Shelly Current A
        active_power_a:
          name: Shelly Active Power B
          filters:
            - multiply: -1
        active_power_b:
          name: Shelly Active Power A
          filters:
            - multiply: -1
        update_interval: 60s

      # NTC Temperature
      - platform: ntc
        sensor: temp_resistance_reading
        name: "Shelly Temperature"
        calibration:
          b_constant: 3350
          reference_resistance: 10kOhm
          reference_temperature: 298.15K
      - platform: resistance
        id: temp_resistance_reading
        sensor: temp_analog_reading
        configuration: DOWNSTREAM
        resistor: 32kOhm
      - platform: adc
        id: temp_analog_reading
        pin: A0

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :apiref:`ade7953/ade7953.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
