components/sensor/ags10.rst, before:

AGS10 Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) Sensor
============================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up AGS10 VOC sensors with ESPHome
    :image: ags10.jpg
    :keywords: AGS10

The ``ags10`` sensor platform VOC sensor allows you to use your ASAIR AGS10
(`datasheet <http://www.aosong.com/userfiles/files/Datasheet%20AGS10.pdf>`__,
`ASAIR`_ ) sensors with
ESPHome. The :ref:`I²C Bus <i2c>` is
required to be set up in your configuration for this sensor to work.

.. warning::

    The sensor supports up to 15kHz operation, so you should specify up to ``frequency: 15kHz`` in your ``i2c`` configuration.


.. _ASAIR: http://www.aosong.com/en/products-86.html

.. figure:: images/ags10.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 30.0%

    AGS10 VOC Sensor

.. code-block:: yaml

    # I²C Bus configuration
    i2c:
      sda: GPIO21
      scl: GPIO22
      scan: true
      frequency: 15kHz

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: ags10
        tvoc:
          name: TVOC
        address: 0x1A
        update_interval: 60s

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **tvoc** (**Required**): The information for the total Volatile Organic Compounds sensor.

  - **name** (**Required**, string): The name for the tvoc sensor.
  - **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Set the ID of this sensor for use in lambdas.
  - All other options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
 
- **address** (*Optional*, int): Manually specify the I²C address of
  the sensor. Defaults to ``0x1A``.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the
  sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.

Actions:
--------

.. _sensor-AGS10SetZeroPointAction:

``ags10.set_zero_point`` Action
-------------------------------

Zero-point of AGS10 has been calibrated before leaving factory. User can re-calibrate the zero-point as
needed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: ags10
        id: ags10_1_id
        # ...

    # in some trigger
    on_...:
      - ags10.set_zero_point:
          id: ags10_1_id
          mode: CURRENT_VALUE

Configuration option:

- **id** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The ID of the AGS10 sensor.
- **mode** (**Required**, enum): One of supported modes:

  - ``FACTORY_DEFAULT`` - reset to the factory zero-point
  - ``CURRENT_VALUE`` - set zero-point calibration with current resistance
  - ``CUSTOM_VALUE`` - set zero-point calibration with resistance pointed with ``value`` option

- **value** (**Optional**, int): nominated resistance value to set (unit: 0.1 kΩ).


.. _sensor-AGS10NewI2cAddressAction:

``ags10.new_i2c_address`` Action
--------------------------------

I2C address of AGS10 can be modified, and it is possible to use multiple AGS10 sensors on one bus.
After sending the command for address changing, the new address is saved and takes effect immediately even
after power-off.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: ags10
        id: ags10_1_id
        # ...

    # in some trigger
    on_...:
      - ags10.new_i2c_address:
          id: ags10_1_id
          address: 0x1E

Configuration options:

- **id** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The ID of the AGS10 sensor.
- **address** (**Required**, int): New I2C address.

  
See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :apiref:`ags10/ags10.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Fix the issues pointed by reviewer: 1. Duplicated config lines were removed. 2. The description of "version" and "resistance" sensors are added.

components/sensor/ags10.rst, after:

AGS10 Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) Sensor
============================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up AGS10 VOC sensors with ESPHome
    :image: ags10.jpg
    :keywords: AGS10

The ``ags10`` sensor platform VOC sensor allows you to use your ASAIR AGS10
(`datasheet <http://www.aosong.com/userfiles/files/Datasheet%20AGS10.pdf>`__,
`ASAIR`_ ) sensors with
ESPHome. The :ref:`I²C Bus <i2c>` is
required to be set up in your configuration for this sensor to work.

.. warning::

    The sensor supports up to 15kHz operation, so you should specify up to ``frequency: 15kHz`` in your ``i2c`` configuration.


.. _ASAIR: http://www.aosong.com/en/products-86.html

.. figure:: images/ags10.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 30.0%

    AGS10 VOC Sensor

.. code-block:: yaml

    # I²C Bus configuration
    i2c:
      sda: GPIO21
      scl: GPIO22
      scan: true
      frequency: 15kHz

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: ags10
        tvoc:
          name: TVOC
        address: 0x1A
        update_interval: 60s

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **tvoc** (**Required**): The information for the total Volatile Organic Compounds sensor.
  All other options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **address** (*Optional*, int): Manually specify the I²C address of
  the sensor. Defaults to ``0x1A``.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the
  sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.
- **version** (*Optional*, int): The firmware version of the sensor.
- **resistance** (*Optional*, int): The initial value of the sesor resistance.

Actions:
--------

.. _sensor-AGS10SetZeroPointAction:

``ags10.set_zero_point`` Action
-------------------------------

Zero-point of AGS10 has been calibrated before leaving factory. User can re-calibrate the zero-point as
needed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: ags10
        id: ags10_1_id
        # ...

    # in some trigger
    on_...:
      - ags10.set_zero_point:
          id: ags10_1_id
          mode: CURRENT_VALUE

Configuration option:

- **id** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The ID of the AGS10 sensor.
- **mode** (**Required**, enum): One of supported modes:

  - ``FACTORY_DEFAULT`` - reset to the factory zero-point
  - ``CURRENT_VALUE`` - set zero-point calibration with current resistance
  - ``CUSTOM_VALUE`` - set zero-point calibration with resistance pointed with ``value`` option

- **value** (**Optional**, int): nominated resistance value to set (unit: 0.1 kΩ).


.. _sensor-AGS10NewI2cAddressAction:

``ags10.new_i2c_address`` Action
--------------------------------

I2C address of AGS10 can be modified, and it is possible to use multiple AGS10 sensors on one bus.
After sending the command for address changing, the new address is saved and takes effect immediately even
after power-off.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: ags10
        id: ags10_1_id
        # ...

    # in some trigger
    on_...:
      - ags10.new_i2c_address:
          id: ags10_1_id
          address: 0x1E

Configuration options:

- **id** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The ID of the AGS10 sensor.
- **address** (**Required**, int): New I2C address.

  
See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :apiref:`ags10/ags10.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
