APDS9306 Sensor
===============

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up APDS9306 sensors.
    :image: apds9306.jpg


.. _apds9306-component:

Component
---------

The ``apds9306`` sensor component allows you to use APDS9306 ambiant light sensors (`datasheet <https://docs.broadcom.com/doc/AV02-4755EN>`) with ESPHome.
The :ref:`I²C <i2c>` is required to be set up in your configuration for this sensor to work.

.. code-block:: yaml

  # Example configuration entry
  apds9306:
    address: 0x52
    update_interval: 60s

  sensor:
    - platform: apds9306
      type: light_level
      name: "APDS9306 Light Level"

Configuration variables:
------------------------

Base configuration:

- **address** (*Optional*, int): The I²C address of the sensor. Defaults to ``0x52``.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval at which the sensor reading will be updated. Defaults to ``60s``.
- **gain** (*Optional*, int): The gain of the ambiant light sensor. One of 1, 3, 6, 9, 18. Defaults to ``1``.
- **bit_width** (*Optional*, int): The bit width/resolution of the ambiant light sensor. One of 
    - 20 - 400ms
    - 19 - 200ms
    - 18 - 100ms (``default``)
    - 17 - 50ms
    - 16 - 25ms
    - 13 - 3.125ms
- **measurement_rate** (*Optional*, int): The measurement rate of the ambiant light sensor. One of
    - 25ms
    - 50ms
    - 100ms (``default``)
    - 200ms
    - 500ms
    - 1000ms

Sensor
------

The ``apds9306`` sensor allows you to use your :doc:`apds9306` to perform ambiant light measurements.

Configuration variables:

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name for the sensor.
- **type** (**Required**, string): The type of sensor measurement, must be ``light_level``
- **id** (**Optional**, :ref:`config-id`): Set the ID of this sensor for use in lambdas.
- All opther options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`