components/sensor/ble_rssi.rst, before:

ESP32 Bluetooth Low Energy RSSI Sensor
======================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up RSSI sensors for the ESP32 BLE.
    :image: bluetooth.svg
    :keywords: ESP32

The ``ble_rssi`` sensor platform lets you track the RSSI value or signal strength of a
BLE device. See :ref:`the binary sensor setup <esp32_ble_tracker-setting_up_devices>` for
instructions for setting up this platform.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    esp32_ble_tracker:

    sensor:
      # RSSI based on MAC address
      - platform: ble_rssi
        mac_address: AC:37:43:77:5F:4C
        name: "BLE Google Home Mini RSSI value"
      # RSSI based on Service UUID
      - platform: ble_rssi
        service_uuid: '11aa'
        name: "BLE Test Service 16 bit RSSI value"
      # RSSI based on iBeacon UUID
      - platform: ble_rssi
        ibeacon_uuid: '68586f1e-89c2-11eb-8dcd-0242ac130003'
        name: "BLE Test Service iBeacon RSSI value"

.. note::

    Service UUID can be 16 bit long, as in the example, but it can also be 32 bit long
    like `1122aaff`, or 128 bit long like `11223344-5566-7788-99aa-bbccddeeff00`.

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the sensor.
- **mac_address** (*Optional*, MAC Address): The MAC address to track for this
  sensor. Note that exactly one of ``mac_address``, ``service_uuid`` or ``ibeacon_uuid`` must be present.
- **service_uuid** (*Optional*, 16 bit, 32 bit, or 128 bit BLE Service UUID): The BLE
  Service UUID which can be tracked if the device randomizes the MAC address. Note that exactly one of
  ``mac_address``, ``service_uuid`` or ``ibeacon_uuid`` must be present.
- **ibeacon_uuid** (*Optional*, string): The `universally unique identifier <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier>`__
  to identify the beacon that needs to be tracked. Note that exactly one of ``mac_address``,
  ``service_uuid`` or ``ibeacon_uuid`` must be present.
- **ibeacon_major** (*Optional*, int): The iBeacon major identifier of the beacon that needs
  to be tracked. Usually used to group beacons, for example for grouping all beacons in the
  same building.
- **ibeacon_minor** (*Optional*, int): The iBeacon minor identifier of the beacon that needs
  to be tracked. Usually used to identify beacons within an iBeacon group.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- All other options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/esp32_ble_tracker`
- :doc:`/components/sensor/index`
- :apiref:`ble_rssi/ble_rssi_sensor.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add resource warnings to BLE, voice and audio component docs (#3298)

components/sensor/ble_rssi.rst, after:

ESP32 Bluetooth Low Energy RSSI Sensor
======================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up RSSI sensors for the ESP32 BLE.
    :image: bluetooth.svg
    :keywords: ESP32

The ``ble_rssi`` sensor platform lets you track the RSSI value or signal strength of a
BLE device. See :ref:`the binary sensor setup <esp32_ble_tracker-setting_up_devices>` for
instructions for setting up this platform.

.. warning::

    The BLE software stack on the ESP32 consumes a significant amount of RAM on the device.
    
    **Crashes are likely to occur** if you include too many additional components in your device's
    configuration. Memory-intensive components such as :doc:`/components/voice_assistant` and other
    audio components are most likely to cause issues.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    esp32_ble_tracker:

    sensor:
      # RSSI based on MAC address
      - platform: ble_rssi
        mac_address: AC:37:43:77:5F:4C
        name: "BLE Google Home Mini RSSI value"
      # RSSI based on Service UUID
      - platform: ble_rssi
        service_uuid: '11aa'
        name: "BLE Test Service 16 bit RSSI value"
      # RSSI based on iBeacon UUID
      - platform: ble_rssi
        ibeacon_uuid: '68586f1e-89c2-11eb-8dcd-0242ac130003'
        name: "BLE Test Service iBeacon RSSI value"

.. note::

    Service UUID can be 16 bit long, as in the example, but it can also be 32 bit long
    like `1122aaff`, or 128 bit long like `11223344-5566-7788-99aa-bbccddeeff00`.

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the sensor.
- **mac_address** (*Optional*, MAC Address): The MAC address to track for this
  sensor. Note that exactly one of ``mac_address``, ``service_uuid`` or ``ibeacon_uuid`` must be present.
- **service_uuid** (*Optional*, 16 bit, 32 bit, or 128 bit BLE Service UUID): The BLE
  Service UUID which can be tracked if the device randomizes the MAC address. Note that exactly one of
  ``mac_address``, ``service_uuid`` or ``ibeacon_uuid`` must be present.
- **ibeacon_uuid** (*Optional*, string): The `universally unique identifier <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier>`__
  to identify the beacon that needs to be tracked. Note that exactly one of ``mac_address``,
  ``service_uuid`` or ``ibeacon_uuid`` must be present.
- **ibeacon_major** (*Optional*, int): The iBeacon major identifier of the beacon that needs
  to be tracked. Usually used to group beacons, for example for grouping all beacons in the
  same building.
- **ibeacon_minor** (*Optional*, int): The iBeacon minor identifier of the beacon that needs
  to be tracked. Usually used to identify beacons within an iBeacon group.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- All other options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/esp32_ble_tracker`
- :doc:`/components/sensor/index`
- :apiref:`ble_rssi/ble_rssi_sensor.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
