components/sensor/cse7766.rst, before:

CSE7766 Power Sensor
====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up CSE7766 power sensors for the Sonoff Pow R2
    :image: cse7766.svg
    :keywords: cse7766, cse7759b, Sonoff Pow R2

The ``cse7766`` sensor platform allows you to use your CSE7766 voltage/current and power sensors
(`datasheet <http://dl.itead.cc/S31/CSE7766.pdf>`__) sensors with
ESPHome. This sensor is commonly found in Sonoff POW R2. CSE7759B is similar to CSE7766
and works with this integration.

.. note::

    SAFETY HAZARD: Some devices such as Sonoff POWs/Shelly/etc, have the digital GND connected directly to mains voltage so **the GPIOs become LIVE during normal operation**. Our advice is to mark these boards to prevent any use of the dangerous digital pins.

As the communication with the CSE7766 done using UART, you need
to have an :ref:`UART bus <uart>` in your configuration with the ``rx_pin`` connected to the CSE7766.
Additionally, you need to set the baud rate to 4800.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    # Disable logging over USB
    logger:
      baud_rate: 0

    uart:
      rx_pin: RX
      baud_rate: 4800

    sensor:
      - platform: cse7766
        current:
          name: "Sonoff Pow R2 Current"
        voltage:
          name: "Sonoff Pow R2 Voltage"
        power:
          name: "Sonoff Pow R2 Power"
        energy:
          name: "Sonoff Pow R2 Energy"
.. note::

    The configuration above should work for Sonoff POWs (R2).

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **current** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the sensor in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power** (*Optional*): Use the (active) power value of the sensor in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **voltage** (*Optional*): Use the voltage value of the sensor in V (RMS).
  All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **energy** (*Optional*): Use the total energy value of the sensor in Wh.
  All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the
  sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.
- **uart_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID of the :ref:`UART Component <uart>` if you want
  to use multiple UART buses.

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :apiref:`cse7766/cse7766.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

add link to Total Daily Energy Sensor
adding these sensors to the HA Energy dashboard will be a common use and a link to the Total Daily Energy Sensor  must therefore be made to achieve that. Hopefully making it easier to find your way as DIY explorer in ESPHome.

components/sensor/cse7766.rst, after:

CSE7766 Power Sensor
====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up CSE7766 power sensors for the Sonoff Pow R2
    :image: cse7766.svg
    :keywords: cse7766, cse7759b, Sonoff Pow R2

The ``cse7766`` sensor platform allows you to use your CSE7766 voltage/current and power sensors
(`datasheet <http://dl.itead.cc/S31/CSE7766.pdf>`__) sensors with
ESPHome. This sensor is commonly found in Sonoff POW R2. CSE7759B is similar to CSE7766
and works with this integration. Optionally :doc:`Total Daily Energy Sensor <total_daily_energy>` can be used to convert power ``W`` into ``kWh``, for example to add to the Home Assistant Energy Dashboard.

.. note::

    SAFETY HAZARD: Some devices such as Sonoff POWs/Shelly/etc, have the digital GND connected directly to mains voltage so **the GPIOs become LIVE during normal operation**. Our advice is to mark these boards to prevent any use of the dangerous digital pins.

As the communication with the CSE7766 done using UART, you need
to have an :ref:`UART bus <uart>` in your configuration with the ``rx_pin`` connected to the CSE7766.
Additionally, you need to set the baud rate to 4800.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    # Disable logging over USB
    logger:
      baud_rate: 0

    uart:
      rx_pin: RX
      baud_rate: 4800

    sensor:
      - platform: cse7766
        current:
          name: "Sonoff Pow R2 Current"
        voltage:
          name: "Sonoff Pow R2 Voltage"
        power:
          name: "Sonoff Pow R2 Power"
        energy:
          name: "Sonoff Pow R2 Energy"
.. note::

    The configuration above should work for Sonoff POWs (R2).

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **current** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the sensor in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power** (*Optional*): Use the (active) power value of the sensor in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **voltage** (*Optional*): Use the voltage value of the sensor in V (RMS).
  All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **energy** (*Optional*): Use the total energy value of the sensor in Wh.
  All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the
  sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.
- **uart_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID of the :ref:`UART Component <uart>` if you want
  to use multiple UART buses.

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :apiref:`cse7766/cse7766.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
