CSE7761 Power Sensor
====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up CSE7761 power sensors for the Sonoff Dual R3 v1.x
    :image: cse7761.svg
    :keywords: cse7761, Sonoff Dual R3

The ``cse7761`` sensor platform allows you to use your CSE7761 voltage/current and power sensors
with ESPHome. This sensor is commonly found in Sonoff Dual R3 v1.x.

.. note::

    SAFETY HAZARD: Some devices such as Sonoff POWs/Shelly/etc, have the digital GND connected directly to mains voltage so **the GPIOs become LIVE during normal operation**. Our advice is to mark these boards to prevent any use of the dangerous digital pins.

As the communication with the CSE7761 done using UART, you need
to have an :ref:`UART bus <uart>` in your configuration with the ``tx_pin`` and ``rx_pin`` connected to the CSE7761.
Additionally, you need to set the baud rate to 38400 and parity to ``EVEN``.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: cse7761
        voltage:
          name: 'CSE7761 Voltage'
        current_1:
          name: 'CSE7761 Current 1'
        current_2:
          name: 'CSE7761 Current 2'
        active_power_1:
          name: 'CSE7761 Active Power 1'
        active_power_2:
          name: 'CSE7761 Active Power 2'

.. note::

    The configuration above should work for Sonoff Dual R3 v1.x.

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **voltage** (*Optional*): Use the voltage value of the sensor in V (RMS).
  All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **current_1** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the channel 1 in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **current_2** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the channel 2 in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **active_power_1** (*Optional*): Use the (active) power value of the channel 1 in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **active_power_2** (*Optional*): Use the (active) power value of the channel 2 in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the
  sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.
- **uart_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID of the :ref:`UART Component <uart>` if you want
  to use multiple UART buses.

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :apiref:`cse7761/cse7761.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
