Sharp GP2Y1010AU0F PM2.5 Sensor
=======================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up Sharp GP2Y1010AU0F particulate matter sensor
    :image: gp2y1010au0f.png

The ``gp2y1010au0f`` sensor platform allows you to use your Sharp GP2Y1010AU0F particulate matter sensor with ESPHome.

It is a very cheap (read: inaccurate) optical (infrared LED and phototransistor) sensor suitable for detecting fine particulate matter like dust and smoke. There are many much better sensors on the market and `supported by ESPHome <https://esphome.io/search.html?q=Particulate>`__, but this is one of the most common and cheapest ones you will find.

While the official `datasheet <https://global.sharp/products/device/lineup/data/pdf/datasheet/gp2y1010au_e.pdf>`__ doesn't mention its sensing resolution (whether it can detect PM2.5 particle or not), some vendors (e.g., `Waveshare <https://www.waveshare.com/wiki/Dust_Sensor>`__) say it can detect particle larger than 0.8 μm in diameter. To make things easier, we'll assume it's capable of that and let the sensor use the PM2.5 device class, reporting in "µg/m³" with 0 accuracy decimals as default.

To use this sensor, you need to setup a voltage sensor source (:doc:`ADC sensor <adc>`, but for example also :doc:`ADS1115 <ads1115>`) and pass it to the sensor with the ``sensor`` option, in order to measure the sensor's output voltage pulses; you also need a binary :ref:`output` to control the sensor's internal IR LED.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    output:
      - platform: gpio
        id: dust_sensor_led
        pin: 5
        inverted: true

    sensor:
      - platform: adc
        id: adc_sensor
        pin: A0
        internal: true
        update_interval: never

      - platform: gp2y1010au0f
        name: 'Indoor PM2.5'
        sensor: adc_sensor
        adc_voltage_offset: 0.2
        adc_voltage_multiplier: 3.3
        output: dust_sensor_led
        update_interval: 10s
        filters:
          - sliding_window_moving_average:
              window_size: 3
              send_every: 3

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the sensor.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **sensor** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The ADC sensor to measure the sensor's output voltage pulses from.
- **adc_voltage_offset** (*Optional*, float): The voltage offset of the ADC sensor used for calibration. Defaults to ``0``.
- **adc_voltage_multiplier** (*Optional*, float): The voltage multiplier of the ADC sensor used for calibration. Defaults to ``1.0``.
- **output** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The binary :ref:`output` to control the sensor's internal IR LED.
- All other options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.


See Also
--------

- `Datasheet <https://global.sharp/products/device/lineup/data/pdf/datasheet/gp2y1010au_e.pdf>`__
- `Application note <https://global.sharp/products/device/lineup/data/pdf/datasheet/gp2y1010au_appl_e.pdf>`__
- `Research notes by Chris Nafis <https://www.howmuchsnow.com/arduino/airquality/>`__
- `Interfacing with Arduino <https://electropeak.com/learn/interfacing-gp2y1010au0f-optical-dust-sensor-module-with-arduino/>`__
- :doc:`adc`
- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :apiref:`gp2y1010au0f/gp2y1010au0f.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`