HMC5883L Magnetometer
=====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up HMC5883L IMU compass sensors.
    :image: hmc5883l.jpg
    :keywords: HMC5883L

The ``hmc5883l`` allows you to use your HMC5883L triple-axis magnetometers
(`datasheet <https://cdn-shop.adafruit.com/datasheets/HMC5883L_3-Axis_Digital_Compass_IC.pdf>`__,
`Adafruit`_) with
ESPHome. The :ref:`I²C Bus <i2c>` is
required to be set up in your configuration for this sensor to work.

.. _Adafruit: https://www.adafruit.com/product/1746

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: hmc5883l
        address: 0x68
        field_strength_x:
          name: "HMC5883L Field Strength X"
        field_strength_y:
          name: "HMC5883L Field Strength Y"
        field_strength_z:
          name: "HMC5883L Field Strength Z"
        heading:
          name: "HMC5883L Heading"
        oversampling: 1x
        data_rate: 15Hz
        measurement_mode: normal
        range: 130uT
        update_interval: 60s

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **address** (*Optional*, int): Manually specify the i^2c address of the sensor. Defaults to ``0x1E``.
- **field_strength_x** (*Optional*): The field strength in microtesla along the X-Axis. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **field_strength_y** (*Optional*): The field strength in microtesla along the Y-Axis. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **field_strength_z** (*Optional*): The field strength in microtesla along the Z-Axis. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **heading** (*Optional*): The heading of the sensor in degrees. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **oversampling** (*Optional*): The oversampling parameter for the sensor.
- **data_rate** (*Optional*): The data rate parameter for the sensor.
- **measurement_mode** (*Optional*): The measurement mode parameter for the sensor.
- **range** (*Optional*): The range parameter for the sensor.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.

Oversampling Options
--------------------

By default, the HMC5883L sensor measures each value 1 times when requesting a new value. You can, however,
configure this amount. Possible sampling values:

-  ``1x`` (default)
-  ``2x``
-  ``4x``
-  ``8x``

Data Rate Options
-----------------

By default, the HMC5883L sensor measures 15 sampled ever second. You can, however,
configure this amount. Possible sampling values:

-  ``0.75Hz``
-  ``1.5Hz``
-  ``3.0Hz``
-  ``7.5Hz``
-  ``15Hz`` (default)
-  ``30Hz``
-  ``75Hz``

Measurement Mode Options
------------------------

By default, the HMC5883L sensor measurement mode is normal. You can, however,
configure this amount. Possible sampling values:

-  ``normal`` (default)
-  ``pos_bias``
-  ``neg_bias``

Range Options
-------------

By default, the HMC5883L sensor measurement range is 130uT. You can, however,
configure this amount. Possible sampling values:

-  ``88uT``
-  ``130uT`` (default)`
-  ``190uT``
-  ``250uT``
-  ``400uT``
-  ``470uT``
-  ``560uT``
-  ``810uT``

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :doc:`template`
- :apiref:`hmc5883l/hmc5883l.h`
- `HMC5883L Library <https://github.com/jarzebski/Arduino-HMC5883L>`__ by `Korneliusz Jarzębski <https://github.com/jarzebski>`__
- :ghedit:`Edit`
