components/sensor/integration.rst, before:

Integration Sensor
==================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up sensors that integrate values over time.
    :image: sigma.png

The ``integration`` sensor is a helper sensor that can integrate values from other sensors over
time. This can for example be useful to integrate the values of a water flow sensor (in m^3/s) over
time (result is in m^3).

This component can be considered a more-generic version of the :doc:`total_daily_energy`.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: integration
        name: "Total Daily Energy"
        sensor: my_flow_meter
        time_unit: min

      # The sensor to integrate, can be any power sensor
      - platform: pulse_counter
        # ...
        id: my_flow_meter

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **sensor** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The ID of the sensor to integrate over time.
- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the integration sensor.
- **time_unit** (**Required**, string): The time unit to integrate with, one of
  ``ms``, ``s``, ``min``, ``h`` or ``d``.
- **integration_method** (*Optional*, string): The integration method to use. One of
  ``trapezoid``, ``left`` or ``right``. Defaults to ``trapezoid``.
- **restore** (*Optional*, boolean): Whether to store the intermediate result on the device so
  that the value can be restored upon power cycle or reboot.
  Warning: this option can wear out your flash. Defaults to ``false``.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- All other options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

.. _sensor-integration-reset_action:

``sensor.integration.reset`` Action
-----------------------------------

This :ref:`Action <config-action>` allows you to reset the value of the integration sensor
to zero. For example this can be used to reset the integration sensor to zero at midnight with
a time-based automation.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      - sensor.integration.reset:  my_integration_sensor

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :doc:`total_daily_energy`
- :doc:`/cookbook/power_meter`
- :apiref:`integration/integration_sensor.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

added min_save_interval to total_daily_energy and integration to keep wear on memory low (#1085)
Co-authored-by: Andreas Hergert <andreas.hergert@otrs.com>

components/sensor/integration.rst, after:

Integration Sensor
==================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up sensors that integrate values over time.
    :image: sigma.png

The ``integration`` sensor is a helper sensor that can integrate values from other sensors over
time. This can for example be useful to integrate the values of a water flow sensor (in m^3/s) over
time (result is in m^3).

This component can be considered a more-generic version of the :doc:`total_daily_energy`.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: integration
        name: "Total Daily Energy"
        sensor: my_flow_meter
        time_unit: min

      # The sensor to integrate, can be any power sensor
      - platform: pulse_counter
        # ...
        id: my_flow_meter

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **sensor** (**Required**, :ref:`config-id`): The ID of the sensor to integrate over time.
- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the integration sensor.
- **time_unit** (**Required**, string): The time unit to integrate with, one of
  ``ms``, ``s``, ``min``, ``h`` or ``d``.
- **integration_method** (*Optional*, string): The integration method to use. One of
  ``trapezoid``, ``left`` or ``right``. Defaults to ``trapezoid``.
- **restore** (*Optional*, boolean): Whether to store the intermediate result on the device so
  that the value can be restored upon power cycle or reboot.
  Warning: this option can wear out your flash. Defaults to ``false``.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **min_save_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The minimum time span between saving updated values to storage. This is to keep wearout of memory low. Defaults to ``0s``.
- All other options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

.. _sensor-integration-reset_action:

``sensor.integration.reset`` Action
-----------------------------------

This :ref:`Action <config-action>` allows you to reset the value of the integration sensor
to zero. For example this can be used to reset the integration sensor to zero at midnight with
a time-based automation.

.. code-block:: yaml

    on_...:
      - sensor.integration.reset:  my_integration_sensor

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :doc:`total_daily_energy`
- :doc:`/cookbook/power_meter`
- :apiref:`integration/integration_sensor.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
