components/sensor/ld2420.rst, before:

LD2420 24Ghz mmWave Radar Sensor
================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up LD2420 sensors.
    :image: ld2420.jpg

Component
---------
.. _ld2420-component:

The ``ld2420`` sensor platform allows you to use the HLK-LD2420 motion and presence sensor.
The :ref:`UART <uart>` is required to be set up in your configuration for this sensor to work.

Depending on the firmware you have serial baudrates will be 256000 for any module with less than
firmware v1.5.3 and 115200 on newer versions. The tx_pin changed from ot2 to ot1 with firmware v1.5.3.
Firmware v1.5.4 and up now features the ability to observe gate energy signal levels and with this
release we can dynamically calibrate gate still and move thresholds.

This component has dynamic configuration functionallity with a compact UI format.
Select, number and button components provide configuration value inputs and control.


.. figure:: /images/ld2420.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 50.0%

    HLK-LD2420 Low power motion and presence sensor.

Pinouts
-------

.. list-table:: Firmware 1.5.2 and older
    :widths: 25 25 25
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Pin#
      - Name
      - Function
    * - 1
      - 3v3
      - VCC
    * - 2
      - GND
      - GND
    * - 3
      - OT1
      - Presence Signal Output
    * - 4
      - RX
      - Serial Rx (to ESP Tx)
    * - 5
      - OT2
      - Serial Tx (to ESP Rx)

.. list-table:: Firmware 1.5.3 and newer
    :widths: 25 25 25
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Pin#
      - Name
      - Function
    * - 1
      - 3v3
      - VCC
    * - 2
      - GND
      - GND
    * - 3
      - OT1
      - Serial Tx (to ESP Rx)
    * - 4
      - RX
      - Serial Rx (to ESP Tx)
    * - 5
      - OT2
      - Presence Signal Output

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    uart:
      id: ld2420_uart
      tx_pin: REPLACEME
      rx_pin: REPLACEME
      baud_rate: 115200
      parity: NONE
      stop_bits: 1

    # The LD2420 has 16 time gate intervals (0-15) with a gate
    # resolution of 0.70 meters
    ld2420:

    text_sensor:
      - platform: ld2420
        fw_version:
          name: LD2420 Firmware

    sensor:
      - platform: ld2420
        moving_distance:
          name : Moving Distance

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: ld2420
        has_target:
          name: Presence

    select:
      - platform: ld2420
        operating_mode:
          name: Operating Mode

    number:
      - platform: ld2420
        timeout:
          name: Detection Presence Timeout
        min_gate_distance:
          name: Detection Gate Minimum
        max_gate_distance:
          name: Detection Gate Maximum
        gate_select:
          name: Select Gate to Set
        still_threshold:
          name: Set Still Threshold Value
        move_threshold:
          name: Set Move Threshold Value

    button:
      - platform: ld2420
        apply_config:
          name: Apply Config
        factory_reset:
          name: Factory Reset
        restart_module:
          name: Restart Module
        revert_config:
          name: Undo Edits


Platform
--------

.. code-block:: yaml

    ld2420:

Configuration variables:
************************

**ld2420** (Required): Component platform.


Select
------

**Operating Modes:**

.. code-block:: yaml

    select:
      - platform: ld2420
        operating_mode:
          name: Operating Mode


The dynamic UI provides 3 operational modes which are **Normal**, **Calibrate** and **Simple** using a select component.

- **Normal**
  This is the default mode. It sets the ld2420 in energy reporting mode and is availble with firmware v1.5.4 or greater.
  When in this mode the module logs all gate energy levels continuouly in a local array making it available
  for dynamic calibration functions.
- **Calibrate**
  When calibration mode is selected the module will collect the average and peak energy levels reporting them every 5 seconds.
  The report is provided in the log console and for information only. In order to calibrate the gate configurations no
  objects should be present in the target environment. The recording will establish the mmWave noise floor levels and
  undesirable reflections or signal distortions peaks. This should be collected for at least 30 seconds. Longer runs can
  catch more potential false signals when devices near the module are used such as Microwave ovens and other signal
  emiting sources.
  When the **apply_config** button is triggered in calibration mode the ld2420 will be configured with calculated values
  based on its collected noise floor data and the module will be returned to Normal Mode. Selecting any other mode drops
  the sessions collected noise data and no changes setting are staged. Once the **apply_config** action is performed it
  will persist. The gate values can be manually adjusted or calibrated again or you can trigger the
  factory reset button.
- **Simple** Provides backward compatibility with firmware v1.5.3 and older and will be automatically set when
  the detected firmware version is v1.5.3 or older.

Configuration variables:
************************

- **operating_mode** (*Required*): Provisions the operating mode select component.

Number
------

.. code-block:: yaml

    number:
      - platform: ld2420
        timeout:
          name: Detection Presence Timeout
        min_gate_distance:
          name: Detection Gate Minimum
        max_gate_distance:
          name: Detection Gate Maximum
        gate_select:
          name: Select Gate to Set
        still_threshold:
          name: Set Still Threshold Value
        move_threshold:
          name: Set Move Threshold Value

Configuration variables:
************************

 - **timeout** (Optional+Inclusive+Group1): The time in seconds during which the occupied state (presence) will persist after presence is no longer detected. Any energy detection within the time window restarts the countdown from this value. Defaults to 120s.
 - **min_gate_distance** (Optional+Inclusive+Group1): Minimum distance for move or still energy detection. Value between 0 and max_gate_distance - 1. Each increment equals 70 cm. Defaults to 1.
 - **max_gate_distance** (Optional+Inclusive+Group1): Maximum gate for movement detection. Value from 1 to 15. Each gate detects movement and still energy at 70 cm increments. At the maximum value, the sensor’s range equates to 16 * 70 cm resulting in an approximately 12-meter range; however, accuracy at this range may be diminished. The recommended maximum value is 12 * 70 cm which results in approximately 9 meters.
 - **gate_select** (Optional+Inclusive+Group2): Gate value to edit selection (Gate # from 0 to 15).
 - **still_threshold** (Optional+Inclusive+Group2): Gate still value threashold level for motion energy detection on currently selected gate number. A value greater than that specified for the gate (distance) will trigger movement detection.
 - **move_threshold** (Optional+Inclusive+Group2): Gate move value threashold level for still energy detection on currently selected gate number. A value less than that specified for the gate (distance) will trigger still detection.

Button
-------

.. code-block:: yaml

    button:
      - platform: ld2420
        apply_config:
          name: Apply Config
        factory_reset:
          name: Factory Reset
        restart_module:
          name: Restart Module
        revert_config:
          name: Undo Edits

Four button components are available enabling configuration controls for editing, saving, restarting and factory reseting the LD2420 module.

Configuration variables:
************************

- **apply_config** (*Optional*): Saves both manual config tuning or the auto calibrate still and move threshold config settings.

- **restart_module** (*Optional*): Reboots the LD2420 modules.

- **revert_config** (*Optional*): Undoes in-progress edits prior to their application via the ``apply_config`` button.

- **factory_reset** (*Optional*): Restores a base set of LD2420 configuration values.

Factory Reset Values:
*********************

.. _ld2420-default_values_for_gate_threshold:

.. list-table::
    :widths: 25 25
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Setting:
      - Value:

    * - Timeout
      - 120s
    * - Min Gate Distance
      - 1
    * - Max Gate Distance
      - 12

.. list-table::
    :widths: 25 25 25
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Gate Number:
      - Move threshold
      - Still threshold
    * - 0
      - 60000
      - 40000
    * - 1
      - 30000
      - 20000
    * - 2
      - 400
      - 200
    * - 3
      - 300
      - 250
    * - 4
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 5
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 6
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 7
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 8
      - 300
      - 150
    * - 9
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 10
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 11
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 12
      - 250
      - 100
    * - 13
      - 200
      - 100
    * - 14
      - 200
      - 100
    * - 15
      - 200
      - 100

Sensor
------

The ``ld2420`` sensor allows you to use your :doc:`ld2420` to approximate the distance
between the sensor and an object moving within its field of detection.

.. code-block:: yaml

    sensor:
      - platform: ld2420
        moving_distance:
          name : Moving Distance


Configuration variables:
************************

- **moving_distance** (*Optional*): Distance between the sensor and the detected moving target.
  All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

Binary Sensor
-------------

The ``ld2420`` binary sensor allows you to use your :doc:`ld2420` to sense presence.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: ld2420
        has_target:
          name: Presence

Configuration variables:
************************

- **has_target** (*Optional*): If a target is detected with either still or in movement **has_target** will be set true
  for the duration of the **presence_time_window** setting.

Text Sensor
-----------

The ``ld2420`` text sensor provides version information for the :doc:`ld2420`.

.. code-block:: yaml

    text_sensor:
      - platform: ld2420
        fw_version:
          name: LD2420 Firmware

Configuration variables:
************************

- **fw_version** (*Optional*): Allows you to retrieve the :doc:`ld2420` firmware version.


Important Information:
**********************

Solid objects and noise outside the ``detection_gate_max`` and ``detection_gate_min`` may cause false
detections or result in abnormal gate thresholds. For example, a wall within the gate max range can result
in signal reflections. If your sensor reports unexpected detections, you should test it by placing it in a
completely open room with no moving objects.

Also, never place two or more sensors in a manner such that their detection fields overlap, as this will certainly
result in false detections.

Firmware update capability is available using the LD2420 tool provided by HLKTech.
You will need to email them and request the bin file.
At this time only firmware version v1.5.6 and up can be upgraded.
**DO NOT** attempt to update to older firmware versions. It will brick the module.

See Also
--------

- Official Datasheet/Manuals are still in development for info email `sales@hlktech.com`
- Official web site `https://www.hlktech.net/`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add full threshold number entries

components/sensor/ld2420.rst, after:

LD2420 24Ghz mmWave Radar Sensor
================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up LD2420 sensors.
    :image: ld2420.jpg

Component
---------
.. _ld2420-component:

The ``ld2420`` sensor platform allows you to use the HLK-LD2420 motion and presence sensor.
The :ref:`UART <uart>` is required to be set up in your configuration for this sensor to work.

Depending on the firmware you have serial baudrates will be 256000 for any module with less than
firmware v1.5.3 and 115200 on newer versions. The tx_pin changed from ot2 to ot1 with firmware v1.5.3.
Firmware v1.5.4 and up now features the ability to observe gate energy signal levels and with this
release we can dynamically calibrate gate still and move thresholds.

This component has dynamic configuration functionallity with a compact UI format.
Select, number and button components provide configuration value inputs and control.


.. figure:: /images/ld2420.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 50.0%

    HLK-LD2420 Low power motion and presence sensor.

Pinouts
-------

.. list-table:: Firmware 1.5.2 and older
    :widths: 25 25 25
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Pin#
      - Name
      - Function
    * - 1
      - 3v3
      - VCC
    * - 2
      - GND
      - GND
    * - 3
      - OT1
      - Presence Signal Output
    * - 4
      - RX
      - Serial Rx (to ESP Tx)
    * - 5
      - OT2
      - Serial Tx (to ESP Rx)

.. list-table:: Firmware 1.5.3 and newer
    :widths: 25 25 25
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Pin#
      - Name
      - Function
    * - 1
      - 3v3
      - VCC
    * - 2
      - GND
      - GND
    * - 3
      - OT1
      - Serial Tx (to ESP Rx)
    * - 4
      - RX
      - Serial Rx (to ESP Tx)
    * - 5
      - OT2
      - Presence Signal Output

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    uart:
      id: ld2420_uart
      tx_pin: REPLACEME
      rx_pin: REPLACEME
      baud_rate: 115200
      parity: NONE
      stop_bits: 1

    # The LD2420 has 16 time gate intervals (0-15) with a gate
    # resolution of 0.70 meters
    ld2420:

    text_sensor:
      - platform: ld2420
        fw_version:
          name: LD2420 Firmware

    sensor:
      - platform: ld2420
        moving_distance:
          name : Moving Distance

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: ld2420
        has_target:
          name: Presence

    select:
      - platform: ld2420
        operating_mode:
          name: Operating Mode

    number:
      - platform: ld2420
        timeout:
          name: Detection Presence Timeout
        min_gate_distance:
          name: Detection Gate Minimum
        max_gate_distance:
          name: Detection Gate Maximum
        gate_select:
          name: Select Gate to Set
        still_threshold:
          name: Set Still Threshold Value
        move_threshold:
          name: Set Move Threshold Value

    button:
      - platform: ld2420
        apply_config:
          name: Apply Config
        factory_reset:
          name: Factory Reset
        restart_module:
          name: Restart Module
        revert_config:
          name: Undo Edits


Platform
--------

.. code-block:: yaml

    ld2420:

Configuration variables:
************************

**ld2420** (Required): Component platform.


Select
------

**Operating Modes:**

.. code-block:: yaml

    select:
      - platform: ld2420
        operating_mode:
          name: Operating Mode


The dynamic UI provides 3 operational modes which are **Normal**, **Calibrate** and **Simple** using a select component.

- **Normal**
  This is the default mode. It sets the ld2420 in energy reporting mode and is availble with firmware v1.5.4 or greater.
  When in this mode the module logs all gate energy levels continuouly in a local array making it available
  for dynamic calibration functions.
- **Calibrate**
  When calibration mode is selected the module will collect the average and peak energy levels reporting them every 5 seconds.
  The report is provided in the log console and for information only. In order to calibrate the gate configurations no
  objects should be present in the target environment. The recording will establish the mmWave noise floor levels and
  undesirable reflections or signal distortions peaks. This should be collected for at least 30 seconds. Longer runs can
  catch more potential false signals when devices near the module are used such as Microwave ovens and other signal
  emiting sources.
  When the **apply_config** button is triggered in calibration mode the ld2420 will be configured with calculated values
  based on its collected noise floor data and the module will be returned to Normal Mode. Selecting any other mode drops
  the sessions collected noise data and no changes setting are staged. Once the **apply_config** action is performed it
  will persist. The gate values can be manually adjusted or calibrated again or you can trigger the
  factory reset button.
- **Simple** Provides backward compatibility with firmware v1.5.3 and older and will be automatically set when
  the detected firmware version is v1.5.3 or older.

Configuration variables:
************************

- **operating_mode** (*Required*): Provisions the operating mode select component.

Number
------

.. code-block:: yaml

    number:
      - platform: ld2420
        presence_timeout:
          name: Detection Presence Timeout
        min_gate_distance:
          name: Detection Gate Minimum
        max_gate_distance:
          name: Detection Gate Maximum

        gate_select:
          name: Select Gate to Set
        still_threshold:
          name: Set Still Threshold Value
        move_threshold:
          name: Set Move Threshold Value

        gate_move_sensitivity:
          name: Move Calibration Sensitivity Factor
        gate_still_sensitivity:
          name: Still Calibration Sensitivity Factor

        gate_0:
          move_threshold:
            name: Gate 0 Move Threshold
          still_threshold:
            name: Gate 0 Still Threshold
        gate_1:
          move_threshold:
            name: Gate 1 Move Threshold
          still_threshold:
            name: Gate 1 Still Threshold

Configuration variables:
************************

 - **timeout** (*Optional+Inclusive+Group1*): The time in seconds during which the occupied state (presence) will persist after presence is no longer detected. Any energy detection within the time window restarts the countdown from this value. Defaults to 120s.
 - **min_gate_distance** (Optional+Inclusive+Group1*): Minimum distance for move or still energy detection. Value between 0 and max_gate_distance - 1. Each increment equals 70 cm. Defaults to 1.
 - **max_gate_distance** (Optional+Inclusive+Group1*): Maximum gate for movement detection. Value from 1 to 15. Each gate detects movement and still energy at 70 cm increments. At the maximum value, the sensor’s range equates to 16 * 70 cm resulting in an approximately 12-meter range; however, accuracy at this range may be diminished. The recommended maximum value is 12 * 70 cm which results in approximately 9 meters.
 - **gate_select** (*Optional+Inclusive+Group2*): Gate value to edit selection (Gate # from 0 to 15). When this variable is defined the component will run in compact UI mode. Gate thresholds are edited by selecting the gate number and then adjusting the move and still thresholds.
 - **still_threshold** (*Optional+Inclusive+Group2*): Gate still value threshold level for motion energy detection on a currently selected gate number. A value greater than that specified for the gate (distance) will trigger movement detection.
 - **move_threshold** (*Optional+Inclusive+Group2*): Gate move value threshold level for still energy detection on a currently selected gate number. A value less than that specified for the gate (distance) will trigger still detection.
 - **gate_still_sensitivity** (*Optional*): Gate still threshold calibration sensitivity factor. Defaults as 0.5 with a range of 0-1, 0 = high and 1 = low.
 - **gate_move_sensitivity** (*Optional*): Gate move threshold calibration sensitivity factor. Defaults as 0.5 with a range of 0-1, 0 = high and 1 = low
 - **gate_n** (Optional): Provides individual gate threshold number inputs when gate_select is not defined. Range is gate_0 to gate_15. Each gate entry requires a still_threshold and move_threshold sub variable.
  - **still_threshold** (Required with gate_n entries): Gate still value threshold level for motion energy detection on currently selected gate number. A value greater than that specified for the gate (distance) will trigger movement detection.
  - **move_threshold** (Required with gate_n entries): Gate move value threshold level for still energy detection on currently selected gate number. A value less than that specified for the gate (distance) will trigger still detection.
Button
-------

.. code-block:: yaml

    button:
      - platform: ld2420
        apply_config:
          name: Apply Config
        factory_reset:
          name: Factory Reset
        restart_module:
          name: Restart Module
        revert_config:
          name: Undo Edits

Four button components are available enabling configuration controls for editing, saving, restarting and factory reseting the LD2420 module.

Configuration variables:
************************

- **apply_config** (*Optional*): Saves both manual config tuning or the auto calibrate still and move threshold config settings.

- **restart_module** (*Optional*): Reboots the LD2420 modules.

- **revert_config** (*Optional*): Undoes in-progress edits prior to their application via the ``apply_config`` button.

- **factory_reset** (*Optional*): Restores a base set of LD2420 configuration values.

Factory Reset Values:
*********************

.. _ld2420-default_values_for_gate_threshold:

.. list-table::
    :widths: 25 25
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Setting:
      - Value:

    * - Timeout
      - 120s
    * - Min Gate Distance
      - 1
    * - Max Gate Distance
      - 12

.. list-table::
    :widths: 25 25 25
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Gate Number:
      - Move threshold
      - Still threshold
    * - 0
      - 60000
      - 40000
    * - 1
      - 30000
      - 20000
    * - 2
      - 400
      - 200
    * - 3
      - 300
      - 250
    * - 4
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 5
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 6
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 7
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 8
      - 300
      - 150
    * - 9
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 10
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 11
      - 250
      - 150
    * - 12
      - 250
      - 100
    * - 13
      - 200
      - 100
    * - 14
      - 200
      - 100
    * - 15
      - 200
      - 100

Sensor
------

The ``ld2420`` sensor allows you to use your :doc:`ld2420` to approximate the distance
between the sensor and an object moving within its field of detection.

.. code-block:: yaml

    sensor:
      - platform: ld2420
        moving_distance:
          name : Moving Distance


Configuration variables:
************************

- **moving_distance** (*Optional*): Distance between the sensor and the detected moving target.
  All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

Binary Sensor
-------------

The ``ld2420`` binary sensor allows you to use your :doc:`ld2420` to sense presence.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: ld2420
        has_target:
          name: Presence

Configuration variables:
************************

- **has_target** (*Optional*): If a target is detected with either still or in movement **has_target** will be set true
  for the duration of the **presence_time_window** setting.

Text Sensor
-----------

The ``ld2420`` text sensor provides version information for the :doc:`ld2420`.

.. code-block:: yaml

    text_sensor:
      - platform: ld2420
        fw_version:
          name: LD2420 Firmware

Configuration variables:
************************

- **fw_version** (*Optional*): Allows you to retrieve the :doc:`ld2420` firmware version.


Important Information:
**********************

Solid objects and noise outside the ``detection_gate_max`` and ``detection_gate_min`` may cause false
detections or result in abnormal gate thresholds. For example, a wall within the gate max range can result
in signal reflections. If your sensor reports unexpected detections, you should test it by placing it in a
completely open room with no moving objects.

Also, never place two or more sensors in a manner such that their detection fields overlap, as this will certainly
result in false detections.

Firmware update capability is available using the LD2420 tool provided by HLKTech.
You will need to email them and request the bin file.
At this time only firmware version v1.5.6 and up can be upgraded.
**DO NOT** attempt to update to older firmware versions. It will brick the module.

See Also
--------

- Official Datasheet/Manuals are still in development for info email `sales@hlktech.com`
- Official web site `https://www.hlktech.net/`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
