components/sensor/mics_4514.rst, before:

MiCS 4514 Gas Sensor
====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up MiCS 4514 Gas sensors.
    :image: mics_4514.jpg
    :keywords: MiCS, 4514, MICS-4514

This component exposes the different gas concentration sensors from the `MiCS-4514 <https://www.dfrobot.com/product-2417.html>`__.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: mics_4514
        nitrogen_dioxide:
          name: Nitrogen Dioxide
        carbon_monoxide:
          name: Carbon Monxide
        hydrogen:
          name: Hydrogen
        ethanol:
          name: Ethanol
        methane:
          name: Methane
        ammonia:
          name: Ammonia
        update_interval: 60s

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **pin** (**Required**, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin where the DHT bus is connected.
- **nitrogen_dioxide** (*Optional*): All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
- **carbon_monoxide** (*Optional*): All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
- **hydrogen** (*Optional*): All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
- **ethanol** (*Optional*): All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
- **methane** (*Optional*): All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
- **ammonia** (*Optional*): All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the
  sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :apiref:`mics_4514/mics_4514.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add note about startup time for mics4514 (#2650)

components/sensor/mics_4514.rst, after:

MiCS 4514 Gas Sensor
====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up MiCS 4514 Gas sensors.
    :image: mics_4514.jpg
    :keywords: MiCS, 4514, MICS-4514

This component exposes the different gas concentration sensors from the `MiCS-4514 <https://www.dfrobot.com/product-2417.html>`__.

.. note::

    The sensor has a 3-minute warmup period where data is unreliable and ESPHome will only start publishing sensor values after this time.
    If the sensor was already powered only, such as if you restarted or updated your ESPHome device, then it will start publishing immediately.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: mics_4514
        nitrogen_dioxide:
          name: Nitrogen Dioxide
        carbon_monoxide:
          name: Carbon Monoxide
        hydrogen:
          name: Hydrogen
        ethanol:
          name: Ethanol
        methane:
          name: Methane
        ammonia:
          name: Ammonia
        update_interval: 60s

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **pin** (**Required**, :ref:`config-pin`): The pin where the DHT bus is connected.
- **nitrogen_dioxide** (*Optional*): All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
- **carbon_monoxide** (*Optional*): All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
- **hydrogen** (*Optional*): All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
- **ethanol** (*Optional*): All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
- **methane** (*Optional*): All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
- **ammonia** (*Optional*): All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the
  sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :apiref:`mics_4514/mics_4514.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
