components/sensor/mopeka_pro_check.rst, before:

Mopeka Pro Check BLE Sensor
===========================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up Mopeka Pro Check or Lippert Propane Tank bluetooth-based sensors in ESPHome.
    :image: mopeka_pro_check.jpg
    :keywords: Mopeka, Mopeka Pro Check, Mopeka Pro Plus, Lippert, Lippert Propane, Lippert Propane Sensor, Lippert Propane Tank Sensor, BLE, Bluetooth

The ``mopeka_pro_check`` sensor platform lets you track the output of Mopeka Pro
Check LP, Mopeka Pro Plus, or Lippert Propane Tank Sensors,   Bluetooth Low
Energy devices using the :doc:`/components/esp32_ble_tracker`. This component
will track the tank level, distance, temperature, and battery percentage of a 
Mopeka Pro Check LP or Mopeka Pro Plus Residential BLE device every time the 
sensor sends out a BLE broadcast.

.. warning::

    This sensor component only supports the following sensors:
      + Mopeka Pro Check devices
      + Mopeka Pro Plus devices
      + Lippert Propane Tank Sensor, part number 2021130655
      
    See :doc:`/components/sensor/mopeka_std_check` for original Mopeka Check sensors support.


(images/mopeka_pro_check.jpg)
(images/mopeka_pro_check_lippert.jpg)

The original Mopeka Check sensors are not supported.

Mopeka Pro Check LP over BLE:
-----------------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

    esp32_ble_tracker:

    sensor:
      # Example using 20lb vertical propane tank.
      - platform: mopeka_pro_check
        mac_address: D3:75:F2:DC:16:91
        tank_type: 20LB_V
        temperature:
            name: "Propane test temp"
        level:
            name: "Propane test level"
        distance:
            name: "Propane test distance"
        battery_level:
            name: "Propane test battery level"

      # Custom example - user defined empty / full points
      - platform: mopeka_pro_check
        mac_address: D3:75:F2:DC:16:91
        tank_type: CUSTOM
        custom_distance_full: 40cm
        custom_distance_empty: 10mm
        temperature:
            name: "Propane c test temp"
        level:
            name: "Propane c test level"
        distance:
            name: "Propane c test distance"
        battery_level:
            name: "Propane c test battery level"


Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **mac_address** (**Required**, MAC Address): The MAC address of the Mopeka/Lippert
  device.

- **tank_type** (**Required**): The tank type the sensor is measuring. See below.

- **custom_distance_full** (*Optional*): distance sensor will read when it should be
  considered full (100%).  This is only used when tank_type = CUSTOM

- **custom_distance_empty** (*Optional*): distance sensor will read when it should be
  considered empty (0%).  This is only used when tank_type = CUSTOM

- **level** (*Optional*): The percentage of full for the tank sensor

  - All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

- **distance** (*Optional*): The raw distance/depth of the liquid for the sensor in mm.

  - All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

- **temperature** (*Optional*): The information for the temperature sensor.
  This temperature is on the sensor and is not calibrated to ambient temperature.

  - All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

- **battery_level** (*Optional*): The information for the battery percentage
  sensor.  Sensor uses a standard CR2032 battery.

  - All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

Tank Types
----------

Currently supported Tank types are:

- ``20LB_V`` - 20 LB vertical tank
- ``30LB_V`` - 30 LB vertical tank
- ``40LB_V`` - 40 LB vertical tank
- ``EUROPE_6KG`` - 6kg vertical tank
- ``EUROPE_11KG`` - 11kg vertical tank
- ``EUROPE_14KG`` - 14kg vertical tank
- ``CUSTOM`` - Allows you to define your own full and empty points

Setting Up Devices
------------------

To set up Mopeka Pro Check / Mopeka Pro Plus / Lippert Propane Tank Sensor devices you first need to find their MAC Address so that
ESPHome can identify them. So first, create a simple configuration with the ``esp32_ble_tracker``
and the ``mopeka_ble`` component like so:

.. code-block:: yaml

    esp32_ble_tracker:

    mopeka_ble:

After uploading, the ESP32 will immediately try to scan for BLE devices.  For Mopeka Pro
Check / Pro Plus / Lippert devices you must press and hold the green sync button for it to be identified.
Or alternativly set the configuration flag ``show_sensors_without_sync: true`` to see all devices.
For all sensors found the ``mopeka_ble`` component will print a message like this one:

.. code::

    [20:43:26][I][mopeka_ble:074]: MOPEKA PRO (NRF52) SENSOR FOUND: D3:75:F2:DC:16:91

Then just copy the address (``D3:75:F2:DC:16:91``) into a new
``sensor.mopeka_pro_check`` platform entry like in the configuration example at the top.

.. note::

    The ESPHome Mopeka Pro Check BLE integration listens passively to packets the Mopeka/Lippert device sends by itself.
    ESPHome therefore has no impact on the battery life of the device.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/esp32_ble_tracker`
- :doc:`/components/sensor/index`
- :apiref:`mopeka_pro_check/mopeka_pro_check.h`
- `Mopeka  <https://mopeka.com/product/mopeka-check-pro-lp-sensor/>`__
- `Lippert <https://store.lci1.com/lippert-propane-tank-sensor-2021130655>`__
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Update mopeka docs (#3394)
* Update Mopeka Pro Check docs for universal sensor

Add indication of universal sensor support
Update language to be more generic instead of listing each sensor in all locations.
Add info regarding propane only

* Fix images in the mopeka pro check docs

components/sensor/mopeka_pro_check.rst, after:

Mopeka Pro Check BLE Sensor
===========================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up Mopeka Pro Check or Lippert Propane Tank bluetooth-based sensors in ESPHome.
    :image: mopeka_pro_check.jpg
    :keywords: Mopeka, Mopeka Pro Check, Mopeka Pro Plus, Mopeka Pro Universal, Lippert, Lippert Propane, Lippert Propane Sensor, Lippert Propane Tank Sensor, BLE, Bluetooth

The ``mopeka_pro_check`` sensor platform lets you track the output of Mopeka Pro
Check LP, Mopeka Pro Plus, Mopeka Pro Universal or Lippert Propane Tank Sensors,   Bluetooth Low
Energy devices using the :doc:`/components/esp32_ble_tracker`. This component
will track the tank level, distance, temperature, and battery percentage of a 
device every time the sensor sends out a BLE broadcast.

.. warning::

    This sensor component only supports the following sensors:
      + Mopeka Pro Check devices
      + Mopeka Pro Plus devices
      + Mopeka Pro Check Universal Sensor
      + Lippert Propane Tank Sensor, part number 2021130655

    Sensors are calibrated for propane only.
      
    See :doc:`/components/sensor/mopeka_std_check` for original Mopeka Check sensors support.

.. figure:: images/mopeka_pro_check.jpg
    :align: center

    Mopeka Pro Check LP over BLE.

.. figure:: images/mopeka_pro_check_lippert.jpg
    :align: center

    Lippert™ Propane Tank Sensor 

The original Mopeka Check sensors are not supported.

Mopeka Pro Check LP over BLE:
-----------------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

    esp32_ble_tracker:

    sensor:
      # Example using 20lb vertical propane tank.
      - platform: mopeka_pro_check
        mac_address: D3:75:F2:DC:16:91
        tank_type: 20LB_V
        temperature:
            name: "Propane test temp"
        level:
            name: "Propane test level"
        distance:
            name: "Propane test distance"
        battery_level:
            name: "Propane test battery level"

      # Custom example - user defined empty / full points
      - platform: mopeka_pro_check
        mac_address: D3:75:F2:DC:16:91
        tank_type: CUSTOM
        custom_distance_full: 40cm
        custom_distance_empty: 10mm
        temperature:
            name: "Propane c test temp"
        level:
            name: "Propane c test level"
        distance:
            name: "Propane c test distance"
        battery_level:
            name: "Propane c test battery level"


Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **mac_address** (**Required**, MAC Address): The MAC address of the Mopeka/Lippert
  device.

- **tank_type** (**Required**): The tank type the sensor is measuring. See below.

- **custom_distance_full** (*Optional*): distance sensor will read when it should be
  considered full (100%).  This is only used when tank_type = CUSTOM

- **custom_distance_empty** (*Optional*): distance sensor will read when it should be
  considered empty (0%).  This is only used when tank_type = CUSTOM

- **level** (*Optional*): The percentage of full for the tank sensor

  - All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

- **distance** (*Optional*): The raw distance/depth of the liquid for the sensor in mm.

  - All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

- **temperature** (*Optional*): The information for the temperature sensor.
  This temperature is on the sensor and is not calibrated to ambient temperature.

  - All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

- **battery_level** (*Optional*): The information for the battery percentage
  sensor.  Sensor uses a standard CR2032 battery.

  - All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

Tank Types
----------

Currently supported Tank types are:

- ``20LB_V`` - 20 LB vertical tank
- ``30LB_V`` - 30 LB vertical tank
- ``40LB_V`` - 40 LB vertical tank
- ``EUROPE_6KG`` - 6kg vertical tank
- ``EUROPE_11KG`` - 11kg vertical tank
- ``EUROPE_14KG`` - 14kg vertical tank
- ``CUSTOM`` - Allows you to define your own full and empty points

Setting Up Devices
------------------

To set up the sensor devices you first need to find the MAC Address so that
ESPHome can identify it. First, create a simple configuration with the ``esp32_ble_tracker``
and the ``mopeka_ble`` component like so:

.. code-block:: yaml

    esp32_ble_tracker:

    mopeka_ble:

After uploading, the ESP32 will immediately try to scan for BLE devices.  Press and hold the sync button for it to be identified.
Or alternativly set the configuration flag ``show_sensors_without_sync: true`` to see all devices.
For all sensors found the ``mopeka_ble`` component will print a message like this one:

.. code::

    [20:43:26][I][mopeka_ble:074]: MOPEKA PRO (NRF52) SENSOR FOUND: D3:75:F2:DC:16:91

Then just copy the address (``D3:75:F2:DC:16:91``) into a new
``sensor.mopeka_pro_check`` platform entry like in the configuration example at the top.

.. note::

    The ESPHome Mopeka Pro Check BLE integration listens passively to packets the Mopeka/Lippert device sends by itself.
    ESPHome therefore has no impact on the battery life of the device.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/esp32_ble_tracker`
- :doc:`/components/sensor/index`
- :apiref:`mopeka_pro_check/mopeka_pro_check.h`
- `Mopeka  <https://www.mopekaiot.com/shop>`
- `Lippert <https://store.lci1.com/lippert-propane-tank-sensor-2021130655>`__
- :ghedit:`Edit`
