components/sensor/pzem004t.rst, before:

Peacefair PZEM-004T Energy Monitor
==================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up PZEM-004T power monitors.
    :image: pzem004t.png
    :keywords: PZEM-004T

.. note::

    This page is incomplete and could some work. If you want to contribute, please read the
    :doc:`contributing guide </guides/contributing>`. This page is missing:

      - An image for the front page.
      - Images/screenshots/example configs of this device being used in action.

The ``pzem004t`` sensor platform allows you to use PZEM-004T energy monitors
(`website <https://innovatorsguru.com/ac-digital-multifunction-meter-using-pzem-004t/>`__) sensors with
ESPHome.

.. warning::

    This page refers to version V1 of the PZEM004T, which has been out of stock for a while.
    For using the newer V3 variant of this sensor please see :doc:`pzemac <pzemac>`.

The communication with this integration is done over a :ref:`UART bus <uart>`.
You must therefore have a ``uart:`` entry in your configuration with both the TX and RX pins set
to some pins on your board and the baud rate set to 9600.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    uart:
      tx_pin: D1
      rx_pin: D2
      baud_rate: 9600

    sensor:
      - platform: pzem004t
        current:
          name: "PZEM-004T Current"
        voltage:
          name: "PZEM-004T Voltage"
        power:
          name: "PZEM-004T Power"
        energy:
          name: "PZEM-004T Energy"
        update_interval: 60s

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **current** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the sensor in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power** (*Optional*): Use the (active) power value of the sensor in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **voltage** (*Optional*): Use the voltage value of the sensor in volts.
  All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the
  sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.
- **uart_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID of the :ref:`UART Component <uart>` if you want
  to use multiple UART buses.

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :doc:`pzemac`
- :doc:`pzemdc`
- :apiref:`pzem004t/pzem004t.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Added more information
This integration also works with PZEM-004 and I have added some hardware tips to connect the device to an ESP.

components/sensor/pzem004t.rst, after:

Peacefair PZEM-004T Energy Monitor
==================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up PZEM-004 and PZEM-004T V1 power monitors.
    :image: pzem-004.jpg
    :keywords: PZEM-004T, PZEM-004

.. note::

    This page is incomplete and could some work. If you want to contribute, please read the
    :doc:`contributing guide </guides/contributing>`. This page is missing:

      - An image for the front page.
      - Images/screenshots/example configs of this device being used in action.

The ``pzem004t`` sensor platform allows you to use PZEM-004 (version with 8-segment screens, `website <https://www.instructables.com/Power-Peacefair-PZEM-004-ESP8266-Arduino-Nano/>`__) and PZEM-004T V1 energy monitors
(`website <https://innovatorsguru.com/ac-digital-multifunction-meter-using-pzem-004t/>`__) sensors with
ESPHome.

.. warning::

    This page refers to version V1 of the PZEM-004T, which has been out of stock for a while. 
    The PZEM-004, however, is still working (and selling) with this protocol and does not use modbus.
    For using the newer V3 variant of this sensor please see :doc:`pzemac <pzemac>`.

The communication with this integration is done over a :ref:`UART bus <uart>`.
You must therefore have a ``uart:`` entry in your configuration with both the TX and RX pins set
to some pins on your board and the baud rate set to 9600.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    uart:
      tx_pin: D1
      rx_pin: D2
      baud_rate: 9600

    sensor:
      - platform: pzem004t
        current:
          name: "PZEM-004T Current"
        voltage:
          name: "PZEM-004T Voltage"
        power:
          name: "PZEM-004T Power"
        energy:
          name: "PZEM-004T Energy"
        update_interval: 60s

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **current** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the sensor in amperes. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **power** (*Optional*): Use the (active) power value of the sensor in watts. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **voltage** (*Optional*): Use the voltage value of the sensor in volts.
  All options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the
  sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.
- **uart_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID of the :ref:`UART Component <uart>` if you want
  to use multiple UART buses.

Hardware considerations:
------------------------
These devices have optocouplers on the UART port and the resistors mounted on the board have been designed to work with 5V devices. 
ESPs need a `Level Shifter <https://www.adafruit.com/product/1875>`__ to be compatible with TTL levels. 

.. note::
   You need a IC level shifter and not a `Mosfet-based <https://www.sparkfun.com/products/12009>`__ level shifter, because you need
   to power the optocoupler's LEDs without an additional resistor in the path.
   
If prefer, you could change the value of the optocoupler's resistors by following `this <https://gregwareblog.wordpress.com/2020/12/13/home-power-monitoring-pzem-004/>`__ or `this <https://www.instructables.com/Power-Peacefair-PZEM-004-ESP8266-Arduino-Nano/>`__ guide.

Your ESP shall be powered by an external power supply and cannot be connected to the PZEM for power.

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :doc:`pzemac`
- :doc:`pzemdc`
- :apiref:`pzem004t/pzem004t.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
