QMC5883L Magnetometer
=====================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up QMC5883L IMU compass sensors.
    :image: qmc5883l.jpg
    :keywords: QMC5883L

The ``qmc5883l`` allows you to use your QMC5883L triple-axis magnetometers
(`datasheet <http://wiki.sunfounder.cc/images/7/72/QMC5883L-Datasheet-1.0.pdf>`__) with
ESPHome. The :ref:`I²C Bus <i2c>` is
required to be set up in your configuration for this sensor to work.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: qmc5883l
        address: 0x0D
        field_strength_x:
          name: "QMC5883L Field Strength X"
        field_strength_y:
          name: "QMC5883L Field Strength Y"
        field_strength_z:
          name: "QMC5883L Field Strength Z"
        heading:
          name: "QMC5883L Heading"
        data_rate: 10Hz
        range: 200uT
        oversampling: 512x
        update_interval: 60s

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **address** (*Optional*, int): Manually specify the i^2c address of the sensor. Defaults to ``0x1E``.
- **field_strength_x** (*Optional*): The field strength in microtesla along the X-Axis. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **field_strength_y** (*Optional*): The field strength in microtesla along the Y-Axis. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **field_strength_z** (*Optional*): The field strength in microtesla along the Z-Axis. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **heading** (*Optional*): The heading of the sensor in degrees. All options from
  :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.
- **data_rate** (*Optional*): The data rate parameter for the sensor.
- **range** (*Optional*): The range parameter for the sensor.
- **oversampling** (*Optional*): The oversampling parameter for the sensor.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.

Data Rate Options
-----------------

By default, the QMC5883L sensor measures 15 sampled ever second. You can, however,
configure this amount. Possible sampling values:

-  ``10Hz`` (default)
-  ``50Hz``
-  ``100Hz``
-  ``200Hz``

Range Options
-------------

By default, the QMC5883L sensor measurement range is 130uT. You can, however,
configure this amount. Possible sampling values:

-  ``200uT`` (default)`
-  ``800uT``

Oversampling Options
--------------------

By default, the QMC5883L sensor measures each value 1 times when requesting a new value. You can, however,
configure this amount. Possible sampling values:

-  ``512x`` (default)
-  ``256x``
-  ``128x``
-  ``64x``

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :doc:`template`
- :apiref:`qmc5883l/qmc5883l.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
