SPL06-007 Temperature+Pressure Sensor
==================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up SPL06-007 temperature and pressure sensors with ESPHome
    :keywords: SPL06-007

The ``spl06_007`` sensor platform allows you to use your SPL06-007
(`datasheet <https://datasheet.lcsc.com/szlcsc/1912111437_Goertek-SPL06-007_C233787.pdf>`__) temperature and
pressure sensors with ESPHome. The :ref:`I²C <i2c>` is required to be set up in your configuration for
this sensor to work.


.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: spl06_007
        temperature:
          name: "Outside Temperature"
          oversampling: 8x
        pressure:
          name: "Outside Pressure"
        address: 0x77
        update_interval: 60s

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **temperature** (*Optional*): The information for the temperature.
  sensor

  - **name** (**Required**, string): The name for the temperature
    sensor.
  - **oversampling** (*Optional*): The oversampling parameter for the temperature sensor.
    See :ref:`Oversampling Options <spl06_007--oversampling>`.
  - **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Set the ID of this sensor for use in lambdas.
  - All other options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

- **pressure** (*Optional*): The information for the pressure sensor.

  - **name** (**Required**, string): The name for the pressure sensor.
  - **oversampling** (*Optional*): The oversampling parameter for the temperature sensor.
    See :ref:`Oversampling Options <spl06_007-oversampling>`.
  - **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Set the ID of this sensor for use in lambdas.
  - All other options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

- **address** (*Optional*, int): Manually specify the I²C address of
  the sensor. Defaults to ``0x76``. Another address can be ``0x77``.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the
  sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.

    Pins on the SPL06-007. Only VCC, GND, SCL, and SDA need to be connected.

.. _spl06_007-oversampling:

Oversampling Options
--------------------

By default, the SPL06-007 sensor measures each value 2 times when requesting a new value. You can, however,
configure this amount. Possible oversampling values:

-  ``1x``
-  ``2x``  (default)
-  ``4x``
-  ``8x``

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :apiref:`spl06_007/spl06_007.h`
- `SPL06-007 Library <https://github.com/rv701/SPL06-007>`__
- :ghedit:`Edit`
