components/sensor/wifi_signal.rst, before:

WiFi Signal Sensor
==================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up WiFi signal sensors that track the RSSI connection strength value to the network.
    :image: network-wifi.svg

The ``wifi_signal`` sensor platform allows you to read the signal
strength of the currently connected :doc:`WiFi Access Point </components/wifi>`.

The sensor value is the `"Received signal strength indication" <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Received_signal_strength_indication>`__
measured in decibel-milliwatts (dBm). These values are always negative and the closer they are to zero, the better the signal is.

.. figure:: images/wifi_signal-ui.png
    :align: center
    :width: 80.0%

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: wifi_signal
        name: "WiFi Signal Sensor"
        update_interval: 60s

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the WiFi signal sensor.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval
  to check the sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- All other options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

.. warning::

    Signal strength readings are only available when WiFi is in station mode. Readings are not valid
    if the device is acting as an access point without any station mode connection.

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :doc:`/components/wifi`
- :apiref:`wifi_signal/wifi_signal_sensor.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add example workaround for static uniqueid
Since the sensor's uniqueid is static you have to use the copy sensor instead. Here's an example of doing that.

components/sensor/wifi_signal.rst, after:

WiFi Signal Sensor
==================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up WiFi signal sensors that track the RSSI connection strength value to the network.
    :image: network-wifi.svg

The ``wifi_signal`` sensor platform allows you to read the signal
strength of the currently connected :doc:`WiFi Access Point </components/wifi>`.

The sensor value is the `"Received signal strength indication" <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Received_signal_strength_indication>`__
measured in decibel-milliwatts (dBm). These values are always negative and the closer they are to zero, the better the signal is.

.. figure:: images/wifi_signal-ui.png
    :align: center
    :width: 80.0%

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: wifi_signal
        name: "WiFi Signal Sensor"
        update_interval: 60s

Note: since this sensor has a static uniqueid reported to Home Assistant, you can only have one sensor of this type in a device. If you want to have another, use the :ref:`copy-sensor`:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry with 2 sensors and filter
    sensor:
      - platform: wifi_signal # Reports the WiFi signal strength/RSSI in dB
        name: "WiFi Signal dB"
        id: wifi_signal_db
        update_interval: 60s
        entity_category: "diagnostic"
        
      - platform: copy # Reports the WiFi signal strength in %
        source_id: wifi_signal_db
        name: "WiFi Signal Percent"
        filters:
          - lambda: return min(max(2 * (x + 100.0), 0.0), 100.0);
        unit_of_measurement: "Signal %"
        entity_category: "diagnostic"

Configuration variables:
------------------------

- **name** (**Required**, string): The name of the WiFi signal sensor.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval
  to check the sensor. Defaults to ``60s``.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- All other options from :ref:`Sensor <config-sensor>`.

.. warning::

    Signal strength readings are only available when WiFi is in station mode. Readings are not valid
    if the device is acting as an access point without any station mode connection.

See Also
--------

- :ref:`sensor-filters`
- :doc:`/components/wifi`
- :apiref:`wifi_signal/wifi_signal_sensor.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
