components/touchscreen/index.rst, before:

Touchscreen Components
======================

.. seo::
    :description: Instruction for using touchscreen components.
    :image: folder-open.svg

The ``touchscreen`` component contains the base code for most touchscreen driver components
available in ESPHome and is responsible for passing the touch events to
``binary_sensors`` with the ``touchscreen`` platform.

.. warning::

    As of version **2023.12** the way how the touchscreen component has changed a bit.
    The following variables are now obsolite:
    *  **rotation** is (temporary) removed in favor the *new* **transform:**
    *  **size_x_y** is moved inside the **transform:** and renamed to **size_xy**
    *  **report_interval** is removed in favor of using the **update_interval**
    The display id is only just to calculate the touch position reletive to the displays *height* and *width*

.. _config-touchscreen:

Base Touchscreen Configuration
------------------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example touchscreen
    touchscreen:
      - platform: ...
        display: display1
        transform:
          mirror_x: false
          mirror_y: false
          swap_xy: false
        calibration:
          x_max: 240
          y_max: 320

        on_touch:
          then:
            ...
        on_update:
          then:
            ...
        on_release:
          then:
            ...

Configuration variables:
************************
- **display** (*Required*, :ref:`config-id`): The display to use this touchscreen with.
- **transform** (*Optional*): Transform the touchscreen presentation using hardware. All defaults are ``false``.

    - **swap_xy** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, exchange the x and y axes.
    - **mirror_x** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, mirror the x axis.
    - **mirror_y** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, mirror the y axis.

- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the touchscreen. Defaults to ``never``.
- **calibration** (*Optional*): When the touchscreen is not given the right configuration settings. You can set them here.

    - **x_min** (*Optional*, int): The raw value corresponding to the left
      (or top if ``swap_xy`` is specified) edge of the touchscreen. See :ref:`touchscreen-calibration`
      for the process to calibrate the touchscreen. Defaults to ``0``.
    - **x_max** (*Optional*, int): The raw value corresponding to the right
      (or bottom if ``swap_xy`` is specified) edge of the touchscreen. Defaults to ``0``.
    - **y_min** (*Optional*, int): The raw value corresponding to the top
      (or left if ``swap_xy`` is specified) edge of the touchscreen. Defaults to ``0``.
    - **y_max** (*Optional*, int): The raw value corresponding to the bottom
      (or right if ``swap_xy`` is specified) edge of the touchscreen. Defaults to ``0``.


- **on_touch** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the touchscreen is touched. See :ref:`touchscreen-on_touch`.
- **on_update** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the touchscreen is touched. See :ref:`touchscreen-on_update`.
- **on_release** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the touchscreen is no longer touched. See :ref:`touchscreen-on_release`.


.. _touchscreen-touchpoint:

``TouchPoint`` Argument Type
----------------------------

Both the :ref:`touchscreen-on_touch` and :ref:`touchscreen-on_update` have an argument of the type :apistruct:`touchscreen::TouchPoint` in a
list (``on_update``) or as an ``optional`` (``on_touch``).

The integer members for the touch positions below are in relation to the display width and height:

- ``id`` is a number provided by the touchscreen to uniquely identify the touch on a multi-touch screen.
- ``state`` indicates the state of the touch. This can be **1**, indicating it is an initial touch, or **2** indicating the touch position has changed/moved.

- ``x`` and ``y`` are the current position.
- ``x_last`` and ``y_last`` are the previous position.
- ``x_first`` and ``y_first`` are the position of the touch when it was first detected.
- ``x_raw`` and ``y_raw`` are for calibrating the touchscreen in relation of the display. This replaces the properties with the same name in the touchscreen classes.

.. _touchscreen-calibration:

Calibration
-----------

For most of the touchscreen drivers the dimensions of the touchscreen are automatically set when the driver is setup.
In some cases like for the **XPT2046** this can be different per used display panel.
Then you can set the values using the **calibrate** values.

To match the point of the touch to the display coordinates the touch screen has to be calibrated.
The touchscreen component returns raw values in the 0 to 4095 range. Those raw values are available
as the ``x_raw`` and ``y_raw`` member variables and for example write them out as in the example
:ref:`touchscreen-on_touch`. The goal of the calibration is to identify the raw values corresponding
to the edges of the screen.

The calibration assumes a display oriented in a way that you will be using it, i.e. your
:ref:`display-engine` component has to have the [0,0] logical coordinate at the top left.

.. note::

    Do not set any calibration values nor ``transform`` settings.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Touchscreen
    touchscreen:
      platform: xpt2046
      id: my_touchscreen
      cs_pin: 17
      on_touch:
        - lambda: |-
              ESP_LOGI("cal", "x=%d, y=%d, x_raw=%d, y_raw=%0d",
                  touch.x,
                  touch.y,
                  touch.x_raw,
                  touch.y_raw
                  );

Get a stylus or a similar object, run the project and touch the corners of the screen at
the edge pixels. Repeat several times and note minimum and maximum x and y raw values.

.. warning::

    As long the calibrate settings are not correctly set, the ``x`` and ``y`` coordinates are not calculated.


.. code-block:: none

    ... top left ...
    [21:07:48][I][cal:071]: x=217, y=34, x_raw=3718, y_raw=445
    [21:07:49][I][cal:071]: x=222, y=32, x_raw=3804, y_raw=419
    ... top right ...
    [21:07:52][I][cal:071]: x=19, y=36, x_raw=334, y_raw=370
    [21:07:52][I][cal:071]: x=22, y=35, x_raw=386, y_raw=347
    ... bottom left ...
    [21:08:00][I][cal:071]: x=224, y=299, x_raw=3836, y_raw=3835
    [21:08:00][I][cal:071]: x=225, y=303, x_raw=3848, y_raw=3878
    [21:08:01][I][cal:071]: x=223, y=299, x_raw=3807, y_raw=3829
    ... bottom right ...
    [21:08:11][I][cal:071]: x=16, y=299, x_raw=281, y_raw=3839
    [21:08:12][I][cal:071]: x=19, y=302, x_raw=328, y_raw=3866
    [21:08:13][I][cal:071]: x=20, y=296, x_raw=358, y_raw=3799

That means that the minimum raw x is 281, maximum 3848, minimum y 347 and maximum 3878.

Identify which raw value is the display's x direction and what the y one. In our case
moving right decreases the x raw value and going down increases the y one so the axes
match and we *don't* need to use ``swap_xy``. If the raw x is the display's y,
use ``swap_xy = true``.

If one of the coordinates goes in the "wrong" direction it needs to be inverted.
The inversion is performed by setting the ``mirror_x`` and/or ``mirror_y`` to true.


.. code-block:: yaml

    touchscreen:
      platform: xpt2046
      calibration:
        x_min: 281
        x_max: 3848
        y_min: 347
        y_max: 3878
      transform:
        mirror_x: false
        mirror_y: false
        swap_xy: false

Compile, run and click on the edges again. The x and y should now match the coordinates
of the display.

.. code-block:: none

    [21:32:34][I][cal:071]: x=7, y=6, x_raw=3755, y_raw=407
    [21:32:37][I][cal:071]: x=237, y=4, x_raw=313, y_raw=385
    [21:32:43][I][cal:071]: x=239, y=318, x_raw=284, y_raw=3845
    [21:33:05][I][cal:071]: x=2, y=313, x_raw=3821, y_raw=3793

Note that the touch screen is not extremely precise and there might be nonlinearities
or similar errors so don't expect a pixel-perfect precision. You can verify the touchpoint
using a display lambda similar to the following.

.. code-block:: yaml

    display:
      - platform: ili9341
        lambda: |-
          auto touch = id(my_touchscreen)->get_touch();
          if (touch) // or touch.has_value()
            it.filled_circle(touch.value().x, touch.value().y, 10, RED);

To be exact, the component does the following

- reads the raw x and y and normalizes it using (non-inverted) min and max values
- swaps x and y if needed
- inverts if needed
- scales to the display dimensions


.. _touchscreen-on_touch:

``on_touch`` Trigger
--------------------

This automation will be triggered when the touchscreen initially detects a touch on the touchscreen; it will not be fired again until
all touches (for multi-touch supported drivers) are released.

NOTE: This has changed (from ESPHome 2023.11.6.) To receive continuous updates from touch drags, use :ref:`touchscreen-on_update`.

This trigger provides two arguments named ``touch`` of type *touchpoint* and ``touches`` with a list of all touches.

.. _touchscreen-on_update:

``on_update`` Trigger
---------------------

This new automation will be triggered when the touchscreen detects an extra touch or that a touch has moved around on the screen.


This trigger provides one argument named ``touches`` of type :apiref:`touchscreen::TouchPoints_t` which has a list of
 :ref:`touchscreen-touchpoint`.

This trigger may be useful to detect gestures such as swiping across the display.

For example you could do:


.. code-block:: yaml

    on_update:
        - lambda: |-
              for (auto touch: touches)  {
                  if (touch.state <= 2) {
                     ESP_LOGI("Touch points:", "id=%d x=%d, y=%d", touch.id, touch.x, touch.y);
                  }
              }

Be aware that you need to check the state flag every time to see if the touch is still valid.

- state value 0. means the touch is invalid as the touch is no longer detected.
- state value 1 means is being the first time detected. 
- state value 2 means the touch is still being detected but is moved on the screen.
- state value 4 and higher means a touch release is detected.

.. _touchscreen-on_release:

``on_release`` Trigger
----------------------

This automation will be triggered when all touches are released from the touchscreen.

At this point of time it has no extra arguments.


Binary Sensor
-------------

The ``touchscreen`` binary sensor allows you to setup areas on the touch screen as virtual
buttons.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: touchscreen
        name: Top Left Touch Button
        x_min: 0
        x_max: 100
        y_min: 0
        y_max: 100
        page_id: home_page_id

Configuration variables:
************************

- **name** (*Optional*, string): The name for the binary sensor.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **touchscreen_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID of the touchscreen.
- **x_min** (**Required**, int): Left coordinate of the screen area to be detected as the virtual button.
- **x_max** (**Required**, int): Right coordinate of the screen area to be detected as the virtual button.
- **y_min** (**Required**, int): Top coordinate of the screen area to be detected as the virtual button.
- **y_max** (**Required**, int): Bottom coordinate of the screen area to be detected as the virtual button.
- **page_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Only trigger this binary sensor if the display is showing this page.

- All other options from :ref:`Binary Sensor <config-binary_sensor>`.


See Also
--------

- :ref:`Binary Sensor Filters <binary_sensor-filters>`
- :doc:`Inkplate 6 Plus </components/display/inkplate6>`
- :doc:`EKTF2232 </components/touchscreen/ektf2232>`
- :doc:`XPT2046 </components/touchscreen/xpt2046>`
- :doc:`TT21100 </components/touchscreen/tt21100>`
- :doc:`GT911 </components/touchscreen/gt911>`
- :apiref:`touchscreen/touchscreen.h`
- :apiref:`touchscreen/binary_sensor/touchscreen_binary_sensor.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1
    :glob:

    *

Commit message:

add `touch_timeout` config option.

components/touchscreen/index.rst, after:

Touchscreen Components
======================

.. seo::
    :description: Instruction for using touchscreen components.
    :image: folder-open.svg

The ``touchscreen`` component contains the base code for most touchscreen driver components
available in ESPHome and is responsible for passing the touch events to
``binary_sensors`` with the ``touchscreen`` platform.

.. warning::

    As of version **2023.12** the way how the touchscreen component has changed a bit.
    The following variables are now obsolite:
    *  **rotation** is (temporary) removed in favor the *new* **transform:**
    *  **size_x_y** is moved inside the **transform:** and renamed to **size_xy**
    *  **report_interval** is removed in favor of using the **update_interval**
    The display id is only just to calculate the touch position reletive to the displays *height* and *width*

.. _config-touchscreen:

Base Touchscreen Configuration
------------------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example touchscreen
    touchscreen:
      - platform: ...
        display: display1
        transform:
          mirror_x: false
          mirror_y: false
          swap_xy: false
        calibration:
          x_max: 240
          y_max: 320

        on_touch:
          then:
            ...
        on_update:
          then:
            ...
        on_release:
          then:
            ...

Configuration variables:
************************
- **display** (*Required*, :ref:`config-id`): The display to use this touchscreen with.
- **transform** (*Optional*): Transform the touchscreen presentation using hardware. All defaults are ``false``.

    - **swap_xy** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, exchange the x and y axes.
    - **mirror_x** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, mirror the x axis.
    - **mirror_y** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, mirror the y axis.

- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to check the touchscreen. Defaults to ``never``.
- **touch_timeout** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The time to automatically check if touch was released. Defaults to ``never``.
- **calibration** (*Optional*): When the touchscreen is not given the right configuration settings. You can set them here.

    - **x_min** (*Optional*, int): The raw value corresponding to the left
      (or top if ``swap_xy`` is specified) edge of the touchscreen. See :ref:`touchscreen-calibration`
      for the process to calibrate the touchscreen. Defaults to ``0``.
    - **x_max** (*Optional*, int): The raw value corresponding to the right
      (or bottom if ``swap_xy`` is specified) edge of the touchscreen. Defaults to ``0``.
    - **y_min** (*Optional*, int): The raw value corresponding to the top
      (or left if ``swap_xy`` is specified) edge of the touchscreen. Defaults to ``0``.
    - **y_max** (*Optional*, int): The raw value corresponding to the bottom
      (or right if ``swap_xy`` is specified) edge of the touchscreen. Defaults to ``0``.


- **on_touch** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the touchscreen is touched. See :ref:`touchscreen-on_touch`.
- **on_update** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the touchscreen is touched. See :ref:`touchscreen-on_update`.
- **on_release** (*Optional*, :ref:`Automation <automation>`): An automation to perform
  when the touchscreen is no longer touched. See :ref:`touchscreen-on_release`.


.. _touchscreen-touchpoint:

``TouchPoint`` Argument Type
----------------------------

Both the :ref:`touchscreen-on_touch` and :ref:`touchscreen-on_update` have an argument of the type :apistruct:`touchscreen::TouchPoint` in a
list (``on_update``) or as an ``optional`` (``on_touch``).

The integer members for the touch positions below are in relation to the display width and height:

- ``id`` is a number provided by the touchscreen to uniquely identify the touch on a multi-touch screen.
- ``state`` indicates the state of the touch. This can be **1**, indicating it is an initial touch, or **2** indicating the touch position has changed/moved.

- ``x`` and ``y`` are the current position.
- ``x_last`` and ``y_last`` are the previous position.
- ``x_first`` and ``y_first`` are the position of the touch when it was first detected.
- ``x_raw`` and ``y_raw`` are for calibrating the touchscreen in relation of the display. This replaces the properties with the same name in the touchscreen classes.

.. _touchscreen-calibration:

Calibration
-----------

For most of the touchscreen drivers the dimensions of the touchscreen are automatically set when the driver is setup.
In some cases like for the **XPT2046** this can be different per used display panel.
Then you can set the values using the **calibrate** values.

To match the point of the touch to the display coordinates the touch screen has to be calibrated.
The touchscreen component returns raw values in the 0 to 4095 range. Those raw values are available
as the ``x_raw`` and ``y_raw`` member variables and for example write them out as in the example
:ref:`touchscreen-on_touch`. The goal of the calibration is to identify the raw values corresponding
to the edges of the screen.

The calibration assumes a display oriented in a way that you will be using it, i.e. your
:ref:`display-engine` component has to have the [0,0] logical coordinate at the top left.

.. note::

    Do not set any calibration values nor ``transform`` settings.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Touchscreen
    touchscreen:
      platform: xpt2046
      id: my_touchscreen
      cs_pin: 17
      on_touch:
        - lambda: |-
              ESP_LOGI("cal", "x=%d, y=%d, x_raw=%d, y_raw=%0d",
                  touch.x,
                  touch.y,
                  touch.x_raw,
                  touch.y_raw
                  );

Get a stylus or a similar object, run the project and touch the corners of the screen at
the edge pixels. Repeat several times and note minimum and maximum x and y raw values.

.. warning::

    As long the calibrate settings are not correctly set, the ``x`` and ``y`` coordinates are not calculated.


.. code-block:: none

    ... top left ...
    [21:07:48][I][cal:071]: x=217, y=34, x_raw=3718, y_raw=445
    [21:07:49][I][cal:071]: x=222, y=32, x_raw=3804, y_raw=419
    ... top right ...
    [21:07:52][I][cal:071]: x=19, y=36, x_raw=334, y_raw=370
    [21:07:52][I][cal:071]: x=22, y=35, x_raw=386, y_raw=347
    ... bottom left ...
    [21:08:00][I][cal:071]: x=224, y=299, x_raw=3836, y_raw=3835
    [21:08:00][I][cal:071]: x=225, y=303, x_raw=3848, y_raw=3878
    [21:08:01][I][cal:071]: x=223, y=299, x_raw=3807, y_raw=3829
    ... bottom right ...
    [21:08:11][I][cal:071]: x=16, y=299, x_raw=281, y_raw=3839
    [21:08:12][I][cal:071]: x=19, y=302, x_raw=328, y_raw=3866
    [21:08:13][I][cal:071]: x=20, y=296, x_raw=358, y_raw=3799

That means that the minimum raw x is 281, maximum 3848, minimum y 347 and maximum 3878.

Identify which raw value is the display's x direction and what the y one. In our case
moving right decreases the x raw value and going down increases the y one so the axes
match and we *don't* need to use ``swap_xy``. If the raw x is the display's y,
use ``swap_xy = true``.

If one of the coordinates goes in the "wrong" direction it needs to be inverted.
The inversion is performed by setting the ``mirror_x`` and/or ``mirror_y`` to true.


.. code-block:: yaml

    touchscreen:
      platform: xpt2046
      calibration:
        x_min: 281
        x_max: 3848
        y_min: 347
        y_max: 3878
      transform:
        mirror_x: false
        mirror_y: false
        swap_xy: false

Compile, run and click on the edges again. The x and y should now match the coordinates
of the display.

.. code-block:: none

    [21:32:34][I][cal:071]: x=7, y=6, x_raw=3755, y_raw=407
    [21:32:37][I][cal:071]: x=237, y=4, x_raw=313, y_raw=385
    [21:32:43][I][cal:071]: x=239, y=318, x_raw=284, y_raw=3845
    [21:33:05][I][cal:071]: x=2, y=313, x_raw=3821, y_raw=3793

Note that the touch screen is not extremely precise and there might be nonlinearities
or similar errors so don't expect a pixel-perfect precision. You can verify the touchpoint
using a display lambda similar to the following.

.. code-block:: yaml

    display:
      - platform: ili9341
        lambda: |-
          auto touch = id(my_touchscreen)->get_touch();
          if (touch) // or touch.has_value()
            it.filled_circle(touch.value().x, touch.value().y, 10, RED);

To be exact, the component does the following

- reads the raw x and y and normalizes it using (non-inverted) min and max values
- swaps x and y if needed
- inverts if needed
- scales to the display dimensions


.. _touchscreen-on_touch:

``on_touch`` Trigger
--------------------

This automation will be triggered when the touchscreen initially detects a touch on the touchscreen; it will not be fired again until
all touches (for multi-touch supported drivers) are released.

NOTE: This has changed (from ESPHome 2023.11.6.) To receive continuous updates from touch drags, use :ref:`touchscreen-on_update`.

This trigger provides two arguments named ``touch`` of type *touchpoint* and ``touches`` with a list of all touches.

.. _touchscreen-on_update:

``on_update`` Trigger
---------------------

This new automation will be triggered when the touchscreen detects an extra touch or that a touch has moved around on the screen.


This trigger provides one argument named ``touches`` of type :apiref:`touchscreen::TouchPoints_t` which has a list of
 :ref:`touchscreen-touchpoint`.

This trigger may be useful to detect gestures such as swiping across the display.

For example you could do:


.. code-block:: yaml

    on_update:
        - lambda: |-
              for (auto touch: touches)  {
                  if (touch.state <= 2) {
                     ESP_LOGI("Touch points:", "id=%d x=%d, y=%d", touch.id, touch.x, touch.y);
                  }
              }

Be aware that you need to check the state flag every time to see if the touch is still valid.

- state value 0. means the touch is invalid as the touch is no longer detected.
- state value 1 means is being the first time detected. 
- state value 2 means the touch is still being detected but is moved on the screen.
- state value 4 and higher means a touch release is detected.

.. _touchscreen-on_release:

``on_release`` Trigger
----------------------

This automation will be triggered when all touches are released from the touchscreen.

At this point of time it has no extra arguments.


Binary Sensor
-------------

The ``touchscreen`` binary sensor allows you to setup areas on the touch screen as virtual
buttons.

.. code-block:: yaml

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: touchscreen
        name: Top Left Touch Button
        x_min: 0
        x_max: 100
        y_min: 0
        y_max: 100
        page_id: home_page_id

Configuration variables:
************************

- **name** (*Optional*, string): The name for the binary sensor.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **touchscreen_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID of the touchscreen.
- **x_min** (**Required**, int): Left coordinate of the screen area to be detected as the virtual button.
- **x_max** (**Required**, int): Right coordinate of the screen area to be detected as the virtual button.
- **y_min** (**Required**, int): Top coordinate of the screen area to be detected as the virtual button.
- **y_max** (**Required**, int): Bottom coordinate of the screen area to be detected as the virtual button.
- **page_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Only trigger this binary sensor if the display is showing this page.

- All other options from :ref:`Binary Sensor <config-binary_sensor>`.


See Also
--------

- :ref:`Binary Sensor Filters <binary_sensor-filters>`
- :doc:`Inkplate 6 Plus </components/display/inkplate6>`
- :doc:`EKTF2232 </components/touchscreen/ektf2232>`
- :doc:`XPT2046 </components/touchscreen/xpt2046>`
- :doc:`TT21100 </components/touchscreen/tt21100>`
- :doc:`GT911 </components/touchscreen/gt911>`
- :apiref:`touchscreen/touchscreen.h`
- :apiref:`touchscreen/binary_sensor/touchscreen_binary_sensor.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1
    :glob:

    *
