components/display/ili9341.rst, before:

ILI9341 TFT LCD
===============

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up ILI9341 TFT LCD display drivers.
    :image: ili9341.jpg

.. _ili9341:

Usage
-----

The ``ili9341`` display platform allows you to use
ILI9341 (`datasheet <https://cdn-shop.adafruit.com/datasheets/ILI9341.pdf>`__,
`Aliexpress <https://www.aliexpress.com/af/Ili9341.html>`__)
displays with ESPHome. As this is a somewhat higher resolution display and may require pins
beyond the typical SPI connections, it is better suited for use with the ESP32.

.. figure:: images/ili9341-full.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 75.0%

    ILI9341 display


.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example minimal configuration entry
    display:
      - platform: ili9341
        model: TFT 2.4
        cs_pin: 14
        dc_pin: 27
        led_pin: 32  ### see note below ###
        reset_pin: 33

        lambda: |-
          it.fill(COLOR_BLACK);
          it.print(0, 0, id(my_font), id(my_red), TextAlign::TOP_LEFT, "Hello World!");

Configuration variables:
************************

- **model** (**Required**): The model of the display. Options are:

  - ``M5STACK``
  - ``TFT 2.4``

- **cs_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The CS pin.
- **dc_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The DC pin.
- **reset_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The RESET pin.
- **led_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The display's backlight pin. **Note:** Connect to a
  PWM-capable pin to switch/dim the display's backlight **or** save a pin by connecting it through a 3.3K resistor to the +3V supply.
- **rotation** (*Optional*): Set the rotation of the display. Everything drawn in the ``lambda:`` will be rotated
  per this option. One of ``0°`` (default), ``90°``, ``180°``, or ``270°``.
- **lambda** (*Optional*, :ref:`lambda <config-lambda>`): The lambda to use for rendering the content on the display.
  See :ref:`display-engine` for more information.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to re-draw the screen. Defaults to ``5s``.
- **auto_clear_enabled** (*Optional*, boolean): Whether to automatically clear the display in each loop (''true'', default),
  or to keep the existing display content (must overwrite explicitly, e.g., only on data change).
- **pages** (*Optional*, list): Show pages instead of a single lambda. See :ref:`display-pages`.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.

Configuration examples
**********************

To utilize the color capabilities of this display module, you'll likely want to add a ``color:`` section to your
YAML configuration; please see :ref:`color <config-color>` for more detail on this configuration section.

To use colors in your lambda:

.. code-block:: yaml

    color:
      - id: my_red
        red: 100%
        green: 3%
        blue: 5%

    ...

    display:
        ...
        lambda: |-
          it.rectangle(0,  0, it.get_width(), it.get_height(), id(my_red));


To bring in color images:

.. code-block:: yaml

    image:
      - file: "image.jpg"
        id: my_image
        resize: 200x200
        type: RGB24

    ...

    display:
        ...
        lambda: |-
          it.image(0, 0, id(my_image));


To configure a dimmable backlight:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Define a PWM output on the ESP32
    output:
      - platform: ledc
        pin: 32
        id: gpio_32_backlight_pwm

    # Define a monochromatic, dimmable light for the backlight
    light:
      - platform: monochromatic
        output: gpio_32_backlight_pwm
        name: "ILI9341 Display Backlight"
        id: back_light
        restore_mode: ALWAYS_ON

See Also
--------

- :doc:`index`
- :apiref:`ili9341/ili9341_display.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add docs for color_pallet mode

components/display/ili9341.rst, after:

ILI9341 TFT LCD
===============

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up ILI9341 TFT LCD display drivers.
    :image: ili9341.jpg

.. _ili9341:

Usage
-----

The ``ili9341`` display platform allows you to use
ILI9341 (`datasheet <https://cdn-shop.adafruit.com/datasheets/ILI9341.pdf>`__,
`Aliexpress <https://www.aliexpress.com/af/Ili9341.html>`__)
displays with ESPHome. As this is a somewhat higher resolution display and may require pins
beyond the typical SPI connections, it is better suited for use with the ESP32.

.. figure:: images/ili9341-full.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 75.0%

    ILI9341 display


.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example minimal configuration entry
    display:
      - platform: ili9341
        model: TFT 2.4
        cs_pin: 14
        dc_pin: 27
        led_pin: 32  ### see note below ###
        reset_pin: 33

        lambda: |-
          it.fill(COLOR_BLACK);
          it.print(0, 0, id(my_font), id(my_red), TextAlign::TOP_LEFT, "Hello World!");

Configuration variables:
************************

- **model** (**Required**): The model of the display. Options are:

  - ``M5STACK``
  - ``TFT 2.4``

- **cs_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The CS pin.
- **dc_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The DC pin.
- **reset_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The RESET pin.
- **led_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The display's backlight pin. **Note:** Connect to a
  PWM-capable pin to switch/dim the display's backlight **or** save a pin by connecting it through a 3.3K resistor to the +3V supply.
- **rotation** (*Optional*): Set the rotation of the display. Everything drawn in the ``lambda:`` will be rotated
  per this option. One of ``0°`` (default), ``90°``, ``180°``, or ``270°``.
- **lambda** (*Optional*, :ref:`lambda <config-lambda>`): The lambda to use for rendering the content on the display.
  See :ref:`display-engine` for more information.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to re-draw the screen. Defaults to ``5s``.
- **auto_clear_enabled** (*Optional*, boolean): Whether to automatically clear the display in each loop (''true'', default),
  or to keep the existing display content (must overwrite explicitly, e.g., only on data change).
- **pages** (*Optional*, list): Show pages instead of a single lambda. See :ref:`display-pages`.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`confihttps://github.com/esphome/esphome.gitg-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **color_palette** (*Optional*): The type of color pallet that will be used in the ESP's internal 8-bits-per pixel buffer.  This can be used to improve color depth quality of the image.  For example if you know that the display will only be showing grayscale images, the clarity of the display can be improved by targeting the available colors to monochrome only.  Options are:
  
  - ``NONE`` (default)
  - ``GRAYSCALE``

Configuration examples
**********************

To utilize the color capabilities of this display module, you'll likely want to add a ``color:`` section to your
YAML configuration; please see :ref:`color <config-color>` for more detail on this configuration section.

To use colors in your lambda:

.. code-block:: yaml

    color:
      - id: my_red
        red: 100%
        green: 3%
        blue: 5%

    ...

    display:
        ...
        lambda: |-
          it.rectangle(0,  0, it.get_width(), it.get_height(), id(my_red));


To bring in color images:

.. code-block:: yaml

    image:
      - file: "image.jpg"
        id: my_image
        resize: 200x200
        type: RGB24

    ...

    display:
        ...
        lambda: |-
          it.image(0, 0, id(my_image));


To configure a dimmable backlight:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Define a PWM output on the ESP32
    output:
      - platform: ledc
        pin: 32
        id: gpio_32_backlight_pwm

    # Define a monochromatic, dimmable light for the backlight
    light:
      - platform: monochromatic
        output: gpio_32_backlight_pwm
        name: "ILI9341 Display Backlight"
        id: back_light
        restore_mode: ALWAYS_ON

See Also
--------

- :doc:`index`
- :apiref:`ili9341/ili9341_display.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
