components/display/ili9xxx.rst, before:


ILI9xxx TFT LCD Series
======================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up ILI9xxx like TFT LCD display drivers.
    :image: ili9341.jpg

.. _ili9xxx:

Models
------
With this display driver you can control the following displays:
  - ILI9341
  - ILI9342
  - ILI9481
  - ILI9481-18 (ILI9481 in 18 bit, i.e. 262K color, mode)
  - ILI9486
  - ILI9488
  - ILI9488_A (alternative gamma configuration for ILI9488)
  - M5STACK
  - S3BOX
  - S3BOX_LITE
  - ST7796
  - ST7789V
  - TFT 2.4
  - TFT 2.4R

More display drivers will come in the future.

Usage
-----
This component is the successor of the ILI9341 component allowing to control more display drivers and use 16bit colors when enough free ram.

The ``ILI9xxx`` display platform allows you to use
ILI9341 (`datasheet <https://cdn-shop.adafruit.com/datasheets/ILI9341.pdf>`__,
`Aliexpress <https://www.aliexpress.com/af/Ili9341.html>`__) and other
displays from the same chip family with ESPHome. As this is a somewhat higher resolution display and may require pins
beyond the typical SPI connections, it is better suited for use with the ESP32.

**Note:** To use 16bit instead of 8bit colors use a esp32 with enough PSRAM the display.

.. figure:: images/ili9341-full.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 75.0%

    ILI9341 display


.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example minimal configuration entry
    display:
      - platform: ili9xxx
        model: ili9341
        dc_pin: 27
        reset_pin: 33
        lambda: |-
          it.fill(COLOR_BLACK);
          it.print(0, 0, id(my_font), id(my_red), TextAlign::TOP_LEFT, "Hello World!");

Configuration variables:
************************

- **model** (**Required**): The model of the display. Options are:

  - ``M5STACK``, ``TFT 2.4``, ``TFT 2.4R``, ``S3BOX``, ``S3BOX_LITE``, ``ST7789V``
  - ``ILI9341``, ``ILI9342``, ``ILI9486``, ``ILI9488``, ``ILI9488_A`` (alternative gamma configuration for ILI9488)
  - ``ILI9481``, ``ILI9481-18`` (18 bit mode)
  - ``ST7789V``, ``ST7796``

- **dc_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The DC pin.
- **reset_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The RESET pin.
- **power_supply** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): The :doc:`power supply </components/power_supply>` to connect to
  this display if required by hardware. The power supply will be turned on before attempting to initialize the display.
- **rotation** (*Optional*): Set the rotation of the display. Everything drawn in the ``lambda:`` will be rotated
  per this option. One of ``0°`` (default), ``90°``, ``180°``, or ``270°``.
- **lambda** (*Optional*, :ref:`lambda <config-lambda>`): The lambda to use for rendering the content on the display.
  See :ref:`display-engine` for more information.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to re-draw the screen. Defaults to ``5s``.
- **auto_clear_enabled** (*Optional*, boolean): Whether to automatically clear the display in each loop (''true'', default),
  or to keep the existing display content (must overwrite explicitly, e.g., only on data change).
- **pages** (*Optional*, list): Show pages instead of a single lambda. See :ref:`display-pages`.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **color_palette** (*Optional*): The type of color pallet that will be used in the ESP's internal 8-bits-per-pixel buffer.  This can be used to improve color depth quality of the image.  For example if you know that the display will only be showing grayscale images, the clarity of the display can be improved by targeting the available colors to monochrome only.  Options are:

  - ``NONE`` (default)
  - ``GRAYSCALE``
  - ``IMAGE_ADAPTIVE``
- **color_palette_images** (*Optional*): A list of image files that will be used to generate the color pallet for the display.  This should only be used in conjunction with ``-color_palette: IMAGE_ADAPTIVE`` above.  The images will be analysed at compile time and a custom color pallet will be created based on the most commonly occuring colors.  A typical setting would be a sample image that represented the fully populated display.  This can significantly improve the quality of displayed images.  Note that these images are not stored on the ESP device, just the 256byte color pallet created from them.
- **dimensions** (*Optional*): Dimensions of the screen with WIDTHxHEIGHT. Usually not needed since ``model:`` has good defaults.
- **height** (*Optional*, int): Specifies height of display in pixels. Use *either* ``dimensions`` or ``height`` and ``width``.
- **width** (*Optional*, int): Specifies width of display.
- **data_rate** (*Optional*): Set the data rate of the SPI interface to the display. One of ``80MHz``, ``40MHz`` (default), ``20MHz``, ``10MHz``, ``5MHz``, ``2MHz``, ``1MHz``, ``200kHz``, ``75kHz`` or ``1kHz``. If you have multiple ILI9xxx displays they must all use the same **data_rate**.
- **spi_mode** (*Optional*): Set the mode for the SPI interface to the display. Default is ``MODE0`` but some displays require ``MODE3``.
- **invert_display** (*Optional*): With this boolean option you can invert the display colors. **Note** some of the displays have this option set automatically to true and can't be changed.
- **offset_x** (*Optional*, int): Specify an offset for the x-direction of the display, typically used when an LCD is smaller than the maximum supported by the driver chip. Default is 0
- **offset_y** (*Optional*, int): Specify an offset for the y-direction of the display. Default is 0.
- **panel_setup** (*Optional*, mapping): Override some panel setup defaults. This requires a map with the following options:

   - **swap_xy** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, exchange the x and y axes. The height and width specified apply *after* the swap. Default is false. By combining this with one of the ``mirror`` options hardware rotation of the display can be controlled.
   - **mirror_x** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, mirror the x axis.
   - **mirror_y** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, mirror the y axis.
   - **color_order** (*Optional*): Should be one of ``bgr`` (default) or ``rgb``.


Configuration examples
**********************

To utilize the color capabilities of this display module, you'll likely want to add a ``color:`` section to your
YAML configuration; please see :ref:`color <config-color>` for more detail on this configuration section.

To use colors in your lambda:

.. code-block:: yaml

    color:
      - id: my_red
        red: 100%
        green: 3%
        blue: 5%

    ...

    display:
        ...
        lambda: |-
          it.rectangle(0,  0, it.get_width(), it.get_height(), id(my_red));


To bring in color images:

.. code-block:: yaml

    image:
      - file: "image.jpg"
        id: my_image
        resize: 200x200
        type: RGB24

    ...

    display:
        ...
        lambda: |-
          it.image(0, 0, id(my_image));


To configure a dimmable backlight:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Define a PWM output on the ESP32
    output:
      - platform: ledc
        pin: 32
        id: gpio_32_backlight_pwm

    # Define a monochromatic, dimmable light for the backlight
    light:
      - platform: monochromatic
        output: gpio_32_backlight_pwm
        name: "Display Backlight"
        id: back_light
        restore_mode: ALWAYS_ON

To configure an image adaptive color pallet to show greater than 8 bit color depth with a RAM limited screen buffer:

.. code-block:: yaml

    image:
      - file: "sample_100x100.png"
        id: myimage
        resize: 100x100
        type: RGB24

    display:
      - platform: ili9xxx
        model: ili9341
        dc_pin: 4
        reset_pin: 22
        rotation: 90
        id: tft_ha
        color_palette: IMAGE_ADAPTIVE
        color_palette_images:
          - "sample_100x100.png"
          - "display_design.png"
        lambda: |-
          it.image(0, 0, id(myimage));

Using the ``panel_setup`` options to hardware rotate the display on a Lilygo T-Embed. This has an st7789v but only uses 170 pixels of the 240 width.
This config rotates the display into landscape mode using the driver chip.

.. code-block:: yaml

    display:
      - platform: ili9xxx
        model: st7789v
        power_supply: power_on
        height: 170
        width: 320
        offset_height: 35
        offset_width: 0
        panel_setup:
          swap_xy: true
          mirror_x: false
          mirror_y: true
          color_order: bgr
        data_rate: 80MHz
        cs_pin: 10
        dc_pin: GPIO13
        reset_pin: GPIO9

See Also
--------

- :doc:`index`
- :apiref:`ili9xxx/ili9xxx_display.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Update config docs for ili9xxx

components/display/ili9xxx.rst, after:

ILI9xxx TFT LCD Series
======================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up ILI9xxx like TFT LCD display drivers.
    :image: ili9341.jpg

.. _ili9xxx:

Models
------
With this display driver you can control the following displays:
  - ILI9341
  - ILI9342
  - ILI9481
  - ILI9481-18 (ILI9481 in 18 bit, i.e. 262K color, mode)
  - ILI9486
  - ILI9488
  - ILI9488_A (alternative gamma configuration for ILI9488)
  - M5STACK
  - S3BOX
  - S3BOX_LITE
  - ST7796
  - ST7789V
  - TFT 2.4
  - TFT 2.4R

More display drivers will come in the future.

Usage
-----
This component is the successor of the ILI9341 component allowing to control more display drivers and use 16bit colors when enough free ram.

The ``ILI9xxx`` display platform allows you to use
ILI9341 (`datasheet <https://cdn-shop.adafruit.com/datasheets/ILI9341.pdf>`__,
`Aliexpress <https://www.aliexpress.com/af/Ili9341.html>`__) and other
displays from the same chip family with ESPHome. As this is a somewhat higher resolution display and may require pins
beyond the typical SPI connections, it is better suited for use with the ESP32.

**Note:** To use 16bit instead of 8bit colors use a esp32 with enough PSRAM the display.

.. figure:: images/ili9341-full.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 75.0%

    ILI9341 display


.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example minimal configuration entry
    display:
      - platform: ili9xxx
        model: ili9341
        dc_pin: 27
        reset_pin: 33
        lambda: |-
          it.fill(COLOR_BLACK);
          it.print(0, 0, id(my_font), id(my_red), TextAlign::TOP_LEFT, "Hello World!");

Configuration variables:
************************

- **model** (**Required**): The model of the display. Options are:

  - ``M5STACK``, ``TFT 2.4``, ``TFT 2.4R``, ``S3BOX``, ``S3BOX_LITE``, ``ST7789V``
  - ``ILI9341``, ``ILI9342``, ``ILI9486``, ``ILI9488``, ``ILI9488_A`` (alternative gamma configuration for ILI9488)
  - ``ILI9481``, ``ILI9481-18`` (18 bit mode)
  - ``ST7789V``, ``ST7796``

- **dc_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The DC pin.
- **reset_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The RESET pin.
- **power_supply** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): The :doc:`power supply </components/power_supply>` to connect to
  this display if required by hardware. The power supply will be turned on before attempting to initialize the display.
- **lambda** (*Optional*, :ref:`lambda <config-lambda>`): The lambda to use for rendering the content on the display.
  See :ref:`display-engine` for more information.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to re-draw the screen. Defaults to ``5s``.
- **auto_clear_enabled** (*Optional*, boolean): Whether to automatically clear the display in each loop (''true'', default),
  or to keep the existing display content (must overwrite explicitly, e.g., only on data change).
- **pages** (*Optional*, list): Show pages instead of a single lambda. See :ref:`display-pages`.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **color_palette** (*Optional*): The type of color pallet that will be used in the ESP's internal 8-bits-per-pixel buffer.  This can be used to improve color depth quality of the image.  For example if you know that the display will only be showing grayscale images, the clarity of the display can be improved by targeting the available colors to monochrome only.  Options are:
- **color_order** (*Optional*): Should be one of ``bgr`` (default) or ``rgb``.

  - ``NONE`` (default)
  - ``GRAYSCALE``
  - ``IMAGE_ADAPTIVE``
- **color_palette_images** (*Optional*): A list of image files that will be used to generate the color pallet for the display.  This should only be used in conjunction with ``-color_palette: IMAGE_ADAPTIVE`` above.  The images will be analysed at compile time and a custom color pallet will be created based on the most commonly occuring colors.  A typical setting would be a sample image that represented the fully populated display.  This can significantly improve the quality of displayed images.  Note that these images are not stored on the ESP device, just the 256byte color pallet created from them.
- **dimensions** (*Optional*): Dimensions of the screen, specified either as *width* **x** *height* (e.g ``320x240``) or with separate config keys. If not provided the dimensions will be determined by the model selected.

    - **height** (**Required**, int): Specifies height of display in pixels.
    - **width** (**Required**, int): Specifies width of display.
    - **offset_width** (*Optional*, int): Specify an offset for the x-direction of the display, typically used when an LCD is smaller than the maximum supported by the driver chip. Default is 0
    - **offset_height** (*Optional*, int): Specify an offset for the y-direction of the display. Default is 0.

- **data_rate** (*Optional*): Set the data rate of the SPI interface to the display. One of ``80MHz``, ``40MHz`` (default), ``20MHz``, ``10MHz``, ``5MHz``, ``2MHz``, ``1MHz``, ``200kHz``, ``75kHz`` or ``1kHz``. If you have multiple ILI9xxx displays they must all use the same **data_rate**.
- **spi_mode** (*Optional*): Set the mode for the SPI interface to the display. Default is ``MODE0`` but some displays require ``MODE3``.
- **invert_display** (*Optional*): With this boolean option you can invert the display colors. **Note** some of the displays have this option set automatically to true and can't be changed.
- **rotation** (*Optional*): Set the rotation of the display. One of ``0°``, ``90°``, ``180°``, or ``270°``, or it can be a set of options describing the way in which the axes are transformed. Note that the size given in ``dimensions:`` should represent the final display size, after rotation. The default rotation is model-specific.

   - **swap_xy** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, exchange the x and y axes. Default is false. By combining this with one of the ``mirror`` options hardware rotation of the display can be controlled.
   - **mirror_x** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, mirror the x axis.
   - **mirror_y** (*Optional*, boolean): If true, mirror the y axis.


Configuration examples
**********************

To utilize the color capabilities of this display module, you'll likely want to add a ``color:`` section to your
YAML configuration; please see :ref:`color <config-color>` for more detail on this configuration section.

To use colors in your lambda:

.. code-block:: yaml

    color:
      - id: my_red
        red: 100%
        green: 3%
        blue: 5%

    ...

    display:
        ...
        lambda: |-
          it.rectangle(0,  0, it.get_width(), it.get_height(), id(my_red));


To bring in color images:

.. code-block:: yaml

    image:
      - file: "image.jpg"
        id: my_image
        resize: 200x200
        type: RGB24

    ...

    display:
        ...
        lambda: |-
          it.image(0, 0, id(my_image));


To configure a dimmable backlight:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Define a PWM output on the ESP32
    output:
      - platform: ledc
        pin: 32
        id: gpio_32_backlight_pwm

    # Define a monochromatic, dimmable light for the backlight
    light:
      - platform: monochromatic
        output: gpio_32_backlight_pwm
        name: "Display Backlight"
        id: back_light
        restore_mode: ALWAYS_ON

To configure an image adaptive color pallet to show greater than 8 bit color depth with a RAM limited screen buffer:

.. code-block:: yaml

    image:
      - file: "sample_100x100.png"
        id: myimage
        resize: 100x100
        type: RGB24

    display:
      - platform: ili9xxx
        model: ili9341
        dc_pin: 4
        reset_pin: 22
        rotation: 90
        id: tft_ha
        color_palette: IMAGE_ADAPTIVE
        color_palette_images:
          - "sample_100x100.png"
          - "display_design.png"
        lambda: |-
          it.image(0, 0, id(myimage));

Using the ``panel_setup`` options to hardware rotate the display on a Lilygo T-Embed. This has an st7789v but only uses 170 pixels of the 240 width.
This config rotates the display into landscape mode using the driver chip.

.. code-block:: yaml

    display:
      - platform: ili9xxx
        model: st7789v
        power_supply: power_on
        height: 170
        width: 320
        offset_height: 35
        offset_width: 0
        panel_setup:
          swap_xy: true
          mirror_x: false
          mirror_y: true
          color_order: bgr
        data_rate: 80MHz
        cs_pin: 10
        dc_pin: GPIO13
        reset_pin: GPIO9

See Also
--------

- :doc:`index`
- :apiref:`ili9xxx/ili9xxx_display.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
