components/display/st7789v.rst, before:

ST7789V TFT LCD
===============

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up ST7789V TFT LCD display drivers.
    :image: st7789v.jpg

.. _st7789v:

Usage
-----

The ``st7789v`` display platform allows you to use
ST7789V (`datasheet <https://github.com/Xinyuan-LilyGO/TTGO-T-Display>`__,
`Tindie <https://www.tindie.com/products/ttgo/lilygor-ttgo-t-display/>`__)
displays with ESPHome. Note that this component utilizes the 4-Wire :ref:`SPI bus <spi>`; the physical
connection is already in place on the TTGO T-Display module as shown below.

.. figure:: images/st7789v-full.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 75.0%

    ST7789V TFT LCD on TTGO T-Display module

This module has a USB-C connector with an on-board serial adapter for programming. Simply connect to a
USB-C port to get started! (Depending on your operating system of choice, you might need to install an
appropriate driver.) It is also possible to power the module via the 5V and G (ground) pins along
the edges of the module, or via a battery attached to the connector on the bottom of the board. The
ESP32's UART pins are not brought out to the headers, so the on-board serial adapter must be used for
hardwired programming. (OTA updates are of course possible after ESPHome is initially installed.)

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example minimal configuration entry
    spi:
      clk_pin: GPIO18
      mosi_pin: GPIO19

    display:
      - platform: st7789v
        backlight_pin: GPIO4
        cs_pin: GPIO5
        dc_pin: GPIO16
        reset_pin: GPIO23
        lambda: |-
          it.print(0, 0, id(font), "Hello World!");

.. warning::

    When using the TTGO T-Display module, the GPIO pin numbers above *cannot be changed* as they are
    hardwired within the module/PCB.

Configuration variables:
************************

- **cs_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The CS pin.
- **dc_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The DC pin.
- **reset_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The RESET pin.
- **backlight_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The display's backlight pin.
- **lambda** (*Optional*, :ref:`lambda <config-lambda>`): The lambda to use for rendering the content on the display.
  See :ref:`display-engine` for more information.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to re-draw the screen. Defaults to ``5s``.
- **pages** (*Optional*, list): Show pages instead of a single lambda. See :ref:`display-pages`.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.

Configuration examples
**********************

As of version 1.15, ESPHome supports color displays. To utilize the color capabilities of this display
module, you'll likely want to add a ``color:`` section to your YAML configuration; please see
:ref:`color <config-color>` for more detail on this configuration section.

To use colors in your lambda:

.. code-block:: yaml

    color:
      - id: my_red
        red: 100%
        green: 3%
        blue: 5%

    ...

    display:
        ...
        lambda: |-
          it.rectangle(0,  0, it.get_width(), it.get_height(), id(my_red));


To bring in color images:

.. code-block:: yaml

    image:
      - file: "image.jpg"
        id: my_image
        resize: 200x200
        type: RGB24

    ...

    display:
        ...
        lambda: |-
          it.image(0, 0, id(my_image));

Complete example
****************

The following is an example YAML configuration that you can add to your base device configuration. It defines:

- three fonts (well, one font in three sizes)
- a ``binary_sensor`` that indicates the state of connectivity to the API
- a ``binary_sensor`` for each of the two buttons on the TTGO module
- a ``switch``, allowing control of the backlight from HA
- several colors
- a color image to be shown on the display
- time, for display...on the display
- the SPI configuration for communicating with the display
- the display component itself, for use on the TTGO module
- a lambda which paints the screen as shown in the picture above:

  - blue borders, with a sort of "title bar" along the top
  - "ESPHome" in yellow in the top left corner
  - the API connection status, "Online" in green when connected, "Offline" in red when not
  - the time and date, more or less in the center of the display

To use this example, you need only to provide the font file, "Helvetica.ttf" (or update it to
a font of your choosing) and an image file, "image.png" (it may also be a ".jpg"). Place these
into the same directory as the YAML configuration file itself. Comment/Uncomment/Modify the
appropriate lines of C code in the lambda to hide or show the image or text as you wish.

.. code-block:: yaml

    color:
      - id: my_red
        red: 100%
        green: 0%
        blue: 0%
      - id: my_yellow
        red: 100%
        green: 100%
        blue: 0%
      - id: my_green
        red: 0%
        green: 100%
        blue: 0%
      - id: my_blue
        red: 0%
        green: 0%
        blue: 100%
      - id: my_gray
        red: 50%
        green: 50%
        blue: 50%

    font:
      - file: "Helvetica.ttf"
        id: helvetica_48
        size: 48
      - file: "Helvetica.ttf"
        id: helvetica_24
        size: 24
      - file: "Helvetica.ttf"
        id: helvetica_12
        size: 12

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: status
        name: "Node Status"
        id: system_status
      - platform: gpio
        pin:
          number: GPIO0
          inverted: true
          mode:
            input: true
            pullup: true
        name: "T-Display Button Input 0"
        id: tdisplay_button_input_0
      - platform: gpio
        pin:
          number: GPIO35
          inverted: true
        name: "T-Display Button Input 1"
        id: tdisplay_button_input_1

    # We can still control the backlight independently
    switch:
      - platform: gpio
        pin: GPIO4
        name: "Backlight"
        id: backlight

    image:
      - file: "image.png"
        id: my_image
        resize: 200x200
        type: RGB24

    time:
      - platform: homeassistant
        id: esptime

    spi:
      clk_pin: GPIO18
      mosi_pin: GPIO19

    display:
      - platform: st7789v
        backlight_pin: GPIO4
        cs_pin: GPIO5
        dc_pin: GPIO16
        reset_pin: GPIO23
        rotation: 270
        lambda: |-
          it.rectangle(0,  0, it.get_width(), it.get_height(), id(my_blue));
          it.rectangle(0, 20, it.get_width(), it.get_height(), id(my_blue));   // header bar

          it.strftime((240 / 2), (140 / 3) * 1 + 5, id(helvetica_24), id(my_gray), TextAlign::CENTER, "%Y-%m-%d", id(esptime).now());
          it.strftime((240 / 2), (140 / 3) * 2 + 5, id(helvetica_48), id(my_gray), TextAlign::CENTER, "%H:%M:%S", id(esptime).now());
          it.print(5, 5, id(helvetica_12), id(my_yellow), TextAlign::TOP_LEFT, "ESPHome");

          // Comment out the above lines to see the image without text overlaid
          // it.image(0, 0, id(my_image));

          if (id(system_status).state) {
            it.print(235, 5, id(helvetica_12), id(my_green), TextAlign::TOP_RIGHT, "Online");
          }
          else {
            it.print(235, 5, id(helvetica_12), id(my_red), TextAlign::TOP_RIGHT, "Offline");
          }

See Also
--------

- :doc:`index`
- :apiref:`st7789v_base/st7789v_base.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Updating the ST7789 docs page to show limitation
Added text to let users know that this platform only supports 135x240 pixel displays correctly. It does not work for other dimension displays because it is hardcoded. A pull exists to fix this, but has not yet been included. https://github.com/fraxinas/esphome/tree/fix_st7789v

components/display/st7789v.rst, after:

ST7789V TFT LCD
===============

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up ST7789V TFT LCD display drivers.
    :image: st7789v.jpg

.. _st7789v:

Usage
-----

The ``st7789v`` display platform allows you to use
ST7789V (`datasheet <https://github.com/Xinyuan-LilyGO/TTGO-T-Display>`__,
`Tindie <https://www.tindie.com/products/ttgo/lilygor-ttgo-t-display/>`__)
displays with ESPHome. Note that this component utilizes the 4-Wire :ref:`SPI bus <spi>`; the physical
connection is already in place on the TTGO T-Display module as shown below.

  | :exclamation:  Currently this only supports 135x240 pixel displays.
  Other displays will not format and display correctly (e.g. 240x320, 240x240, etc.).


.. figure:: images/st7789v-full.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 75.0%

    ST7789V TFT LCD on TTGO T-Display module

This module has a USB-C connector with an on-board serial adapter for programming. Simply connect to a
USB-C port to get started! (Depending on your operating system of choice, you might need to install an
appropriate driver.) It is also possible to power the module via the 5V and G (ground) pins along
the edges of the module, or via a battery attached to the connector on the bottom of the board. The
ESP32's UART pins are not brought out to the headers, so the on-board serial adapter must be used for
hardwired programming. (OTA updates are of course possible after ESPHome is initially installed.)

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example minimal configuration entry
    spi:
      clk_pin: GPIO18
      mosi_pin: GPIO19

    display:
      - platform: st7789v
        backlight_pin: GPIO4
        cs_pin: GPIO5
        dc_pin: GPIO16
        reset_pin: GPIO23
        lambda: |-
          it.print(0, 0, id(font), "Hello World!");

.. warning::

    When using the TTGO T-Display module, the GPIO pin numbers above *cannot be changed* as they are
    hardwired within the module/PCB.

Configuration variables:
************************

- **cs_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The CS pin.
- **dc_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The DC pin.
- **reset_pin** (**Required**, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The RESET pin.
- **backlight_pin** (*Optional*, :ref:`Pin Schema <config-pin_schema>`): The display's backlight pin.
- **lambda** (*Optional*, :ref:`lambda <config-lambda>`): The lambda to use for rendering the content on the display.
  See :ref:`display-engine` for more information.
- **update_interval** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-time`): The interval to re-draw the screen. Defaults to ``5s``.
- **pages** (*Optional*, list): Show pages instead of a single lambda. See :ref:`display-pages`.
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.

Configuration examples
**********************

As of version 1.15, ESPHome supports color displays. To utilize the color capabilities of this display
module, you'll likely want to add a ``color:`` section to your YAML configuration; please see
:ref:`color <config-color>` for more detail on this configuration section.

To use colors in your lambda:

.. code-block:: yaml

    color:
      - id: my_red
        red: 100%
        green: 3%
        blue: 5%

    ...

    display:
        ...
        lambda: |-
          it.rectangle(0,  0, it.get_width(), it.get_height(), id(my_red));


To bring in color images:

.. code-block:: yaml

    image:
      - file: "image.jpg"
        id: my_image
        resize: 200x200
        type: RGB24

    ...

    display:
        ...
        lambda: |-
          it.image(0, 0, id(my_image));

Complete example
****************

The following is an example YAML configuration that you can add to your base device configuration. It defines:

- three fonts (well, one font in three sizes)
- a ``binary_sensor`` that indicates the state of connectivity to the API
- a ``binary_sensor`` for each of the two buttons on the TTGO module
- a ``switch``, allowing control of the backlight from HA
- several colors
- a color image to be shown on the display
- time, for display...on the display
- the SPI configuration for communicating with the display
- the display component itself, for use on the TTGO module
- a lambda which paints the screen as shown in the picture above:

  - blue borders, with a sort of "title bar" along the top
  - "ESPHome" in yellow in the top left corner
  - the API connection status, "Online" in green when connected, "Offline" in red when not
  - the time and date, more or less in the center of the display

To use this example, you need only to provide the font file, "Helvetica.ttf" (or update it to
a font of your choosing) and an image file, "image.png" (it may also be a ".jpg"). Place these
into the same directory as the YAML configuration file itself. Comment/Uncomment/Modify the
appropriate lines of C code in the lambda to hide or show the image or text as you wish.

.. code-block:: yaml

    color:
      - id: my_red
        red: 100%
        green: 0%
        blue: 0%
      - id: my_yellow
        red: 100%
        green: 100%
        blue: 0%
      - id: my_green
        red: 0%
        green: 100%
        blue: 0%
      - id: my_blue
        red: 0%
        green: 0%
        blue: 100%
      - id: my_gray
        red: 50%
        green: 50%
        blue: 50%

    font:
      - file: "Helvetica.ttf"
        id: helvetica_48
        size: 48
      - file: "Helvetica.ttf"
        id: helvetica_24
        size: 24
      - file: "Helvetica.ttf"
        id: helvetica_12
        size: 12

    binary_sensor:
      - platform: status
        name: "Node Status"
        id: system_status
      - platform: gpio
        pin:
          number: GPIO0
          inverted: true
          mode:
            input: true
            pullup: true
        name: "T-Display Button Input 0"
        id: tdisplay_button_input_0
      - platform: gpio
        pin:
          number: GPIO35
          inverted: true
        name: "T-Display Button Input 1"
        id: tdisplay_button_input_1

    # We can still control the backlight independently
    switch:
      - platform: gpio
        pin: GPIO4
        name: "Backlight"
        id: backlight

    image:
      - file: "image.png"
        id: my_image
        resize: 200x200
        type: RGB24

    time:
      - platform: homeassistant
        id: esptime

    spi:
      clk_pin: GPIO18
      mosi_pin: GPIO19

    display:
      - platform: st7789v
        backlight_pin: GPIO4
        cs_pin: GPIO5
        dc_pin: GPIO16
        reset_pin: GPIO23
        rotation: 270
        lambda: |-
          it.rectangle(0,  0, it.get_width(), it.get_height(), id(my_blue));
          it.rectangle(0, 20, it.get_width(), it.get_height(), id(my_blue));   // header bar

          it.strftime((240 / 2), (140 / 3) * 1 + 5, id(helvetica_24), id(my_gray), TextAlign::CENTER, "%Y-%m-%d", id(esptime).now());
          it.strftime((240 / 2), (140 / 3) * 2 + 5, id(helvetica_48), id(my_gray), TextAlign::CENTER, "%H:%M:%S", id(esptime).now());
          it.print(5, 5, id(helvetica_12), id(my_yellow), TextAlign::TOP_LEFT, "ESPHome");

          // Comment out the above lines to see the image without text overlaid
          // it.image(0, 0, id(my_image));

          if (id(system_status).state) {
            it.print(235, 5, id(helvetica_12), id(my_green), TextAlign::TOP_RIGHT, "Online");
          }
          else {
            it.print(235, 5, id(helvetica_12), id(my_red), TextAlign::TOP_RIGHT, "Offline");
          }

See Also
--------

- :doc:`index`
- :apiref:`st7789v_base/st7789v_base.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
