guides/creators.rst, before:

Sharing ESPHome devices
=======================

.. seo::
    :description: Information for creating and sharing devices using ESPHome firmware.

We have added configuration options to ESPHome to make it easier
to create, configure, install and distribute devices running ESPHome.

No part of a "template" configuration should have any references to secrets,
or have passwords pre-applied. ESPHome makes it easy for the end-user to add these
themselves after they adopt the device into their own ESPHome dashboard.

Example configuration
---------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # These substitutions allow the end user to override certain values
    substitutions:
      name: "project-template"
      friendly_name: "Project Template"

    esphome:
      name: "${name}"
      # Friendly names are used where appropriate in Home Assistant
      friendly_name: "${friendly_name}"
      # Automatically add the mac address to the name
      # so you can use a single firmware for all devices
      name_add_mac_suffix: true

      # This will allow for (future) project identification,
      # configuration and updates.
      project:
        name: esphome.project-template
        version: "1.0"

    # To be able to get logs from the device via serial and api.
    logger:

    # API is a requirement of the dashboard import.
    api:

    # OTA is required for Over-the-Air updating
    ota:

    # This should point to the public location of this yaml file.
    dashboard_import:
      package_import_url: github://esphome/esphome-project-template/project-template-esp32.yaml@v6
      import_full_config: false # or true

    wifi:
      # Set up a wifi access point
      ap:
        password: "12345678"

    # In combination with the `ap` this allows the user
    # to provision wifi credentials to the device.
    captive_portal:

    # Sets up Bluetooth LE (Only on ESP32) to allow the user
    # to provision wifi credentials to the device.
    esp32_improv:
      authorizer: none

    # Sets up the improv via serial client for Wi-Fi provisioning
    improv_serial:
      next_url: https://example.com/project-template/manual?ip={{ip_address}}&name={{device_name}}&version={{esphome_version}}


Relevant Documentation
----------------------

- ``name_add_mac_suffix`` - :ref:`esphome-mac_suffix`
- ``project`` - :ref:`esphome-creators_project`
- ``esp32_improv`` - :doc:`/components/esp32_improv`
- ``captive_portal`` - :doc:`/components/captive_portal`
- ``wifi`` -> ``ap`` allows you to flash a device that will not contain any
  credentials and they must be set by the user via either the ``ap`` + ``captive_portal`` or
  the ``esp32_improv`` / ``improv_serial`` components.
- ``dashboard_import``
  -  ``package_import_url`` - This should point to the public repository containing
  the configuration for the device so that the user's ESPHome dashboard can autodetect this device and
  create a minimal YAML using :ref:`config-git_packages`.
  - ``import_full_config`` - This signals if ESPHome should download the entire YAML file as the user's config YAML instead of referencing the package. Set this to `true` if you are creating a tutorial to let users easily tweak the whole configuration or be able to uncomment follow-up tutorial steps.
- ``improv_serial`` - :doc:`/components/improv_serial`

See Also
--------

- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Add note for project info requirement for dashboard import

guides/creators.rst, after:

Sharing ESPHome devices
=======================

.. seo::
    :description: Information for creating and sharing devices using ESPHome firmware.

We have added configuration options to ESPHome to make it easier
to create, configure, install and distribute devices running ESPHome.

No part of a "template" configuration should have any references to secrets,
or have passwords pre-applied. ESPHome makes it easy for the end-user to add these
themselves after they adopt the device into their own ESPHome dashboard.

Example configuration
---------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # These substitutions allow the end user to override certain values
    substitutions:
      name: "project-template"
      friendly_name: "Project Template"

    esphome:
      name: "${name}"
      # Friendly names are used where appropriate in Home Assistant
      friendly_name: "${friendly_name}"
      # Automatically add the mac address to the name
      # so you can use a single firmware for all devices
      name_add_mac_suffix: true

      # This will allow for (future) project identification,
      # configuration and updates.
      project:
        name: esphome.project-template
        version: "1.0"

    # To be able to get logs from the device via serial and api.
    logger:

    # API is a requirement of the dashboard import.
    api:

    # OTA is required for Over-the-Air updating
    ota:

    # This should point to the public location of this yaml file.
    dashboard_import:
      package_import_url: github://esphome/esphome-project-template/project-template-esp32.yaml@v6
      import_full_config: false # or true

    wifi:
      # Set up a wifi access point
      ap:
        password: "12345678"

    # In combination with the `ap` this allows the user
    # to provision wifi credentials to the device.
    captive_portal:

    # Sets up Bluetooth LE (Only on ESP32) to allow the user
    # to provision wifi credentials to the device.
    esp32_improv:
      authorizer: none

    # Sets up the improv via serial client for Wi-Fi provisioning
    improv_serial:
      next_url: https://example.com/project-template/manual?ip={{ip_address}}&name={{device_name}}&version={{esphome_version}}


Relevant Documentation
----------------------

- ``name_add_mac_suffix`` - :ref:`esphome-mac_suffix`
- ``project`` - :ref:`esphome-creators_project`
- ``esp32_improv`` - :doc:`/components/esp32_improv`
- ``captive_portal`` - :doc:`/components/captive_portal`
- ``wifi`` -> ``ap`` allows you to flash a device that will not contain any
  credentials and they must be set by the user via either the ``ap`` + ``captive_portal`` or
  the ``esp32_improv`` / ``improv_serial`` components.
- ``dashboard_import``
    .. note::
        The :ref:`esphome-creators_project` above is required for adoption to work in the Dashboard.

    - ``package_import_url`` - This should point to the public repository containing
      the configuration for the device so that the user's ESPHome dashboard can autodetect this device and
      create a minimal YAML using :ref:`config-git_packages`.
    - ``import_full_config`` - This signals if ESPHome should download the entire YAML file as the user's config
      YAML instead of referencing the package. Set this to ``true`` if you are creating a tutorial to let users
      easily tweak the whole configuration or be able to uncomment follow-up tutorial steps.
- ``improv_serial`` - :doc:`/components/improv_serial`

See Also
--------

- :ghedit:`Edit`
