guides/made_for_esphome.rst, before:

.. _made_for_esphome:

Made for ESPHome
================

.. seo::
    :description: Information about the Made for ESPHome program
    :image: /_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-white.png

ESPHome has a great and active community that loves creating and sharing projects.
You can apply for your project to get the Made for ESPHome stamp of approval.
This ensures that your project is powered by ESPHome and guarantees a
minimum level of customizability to users.

Requirements
------------

Your product has to match the following requirements:
 - Your project is powered by ESPHome
 - Your ESPHome configuration is open source
 - Users should be able to apply updates if your project sells ready-made devices
 - Your project supports adoption via the ``dashboard_import`` feature of ESPHome
   (see :doc:`Sharing </guides/creators>`)
 - Your product name cannot contain **ESPHome** except in the case of *ending with* **for ESPHome**

When your project matches all requirements of the Made for ESPHome program,
you can apply for permission to carry the logo by emailing esphome@nabucasa.com

Logos
-----

.. raw:: html

    <style>
        .transparent-background img {
            background: repeating-conic-gradient(#999 0% 25%, transparent 10% 50%) 50% / 10px 10px;
        }
    </style>

.. figure:: /_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-white.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :class: transparent-background

    Made with ESPHome black on white (`svg </_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-white.svg>`__, `png </_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-white.png>`__)

.. figure:: /_static/made-for-esphome-white-on-black.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :class: transparent-background

    Made with ESPHome white on black (`svg </_static/made-for-esphome-white-on-black.svg>`__, `png </_static/made-for-esphome-white-on-black.png>`__)

.. figure:: /_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-transparent.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :class: transparent-background

    Made with ESPHome black on transparent (`svg </_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-transparent.svg>`__, `png </_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-transparent.png>`__)

.. figure:: /_static/made-for-esphome-white-on-transparent.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :class: transparent-background

    Made with ESPHome white on transparent (`svg </_static/made-for-esphome-white-on-transparent.svg>`__, `png </_static/made-for-esphome-white-on-transparent.png>`__)

Commit message:

Add esp32 + improv requirements for Made for ESPHome

guides/made_for_esphome.rst, after:

.. _made_for_esphome:

Made for ESPHome
================

.. seo::
    :description: Information about the Made for ESPHome program
    :image: /_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-white.png

ESPHome has a great and active community that loves creating and sharing projects.
You can apply for your project to get the Made for ESPHome stamp of approval.
This ensures that your project is powered by ESPHome and guarantees a
minimum level of customizability to users.

Requirements
------------

Your product has to match the following requirements:
 - Your project is powered by ESPHome
 - Your project is powered by an ESP32
 - Your ESPHome configuration is open source
 - Users should be able to apply updates if your project sells ready-made devices
 - Your project supports adoption via the ``dashboard_import`` feature of ESPHome
   (see :doc:`Sharing </guides/creators>`)
 - Your product name cannot contain **ESPHome** except in the case of *ending with* **for ESPHome**
 - Your configuration utilises ``esp32_improv`` and ``improv_serial`` (if a USB connection is available) for easy end-user provisioning.

When your project matches all requirements of the Made for ESPHome program,
you can apply for permission to carry the logo by emailing esphome@nabucasa.com

Logos
-----

.. raw:: html

    <style>
        .transparent-background img {
            background: repeating-conic-gradient(#999 0% 25%, transparent 10% 50%) 50% / 10px 10px;
        }
    </style>

.. figure:: /_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-white.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :class: transparent-background

    Made with ESPHome black on white (`svg </_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-white.svg>`__, `png </_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-white.png>`__)

.. figure:: /_static/made-for-esphome-white-on-black.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :class: transparent-background

    Made with ESPHome white on black (`svg </_static/made-for-esphome-white-on-black.svg>`__, `png </_static/made-for-esphome-white-on-black.png>`__)

.. figure:: /_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-transparent.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :class: transparent-background

    Made with ESPHome black on transparent (`svg </_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-transparent.svg>`__, `png </_static/made-for-esphome-black-on-transparent.png>`__)

.. figure:: /_static/made-for-esphome-white-on-transparent.svg
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :class: transparent-background

    Made with ESPHome white on transparent (`svg </_static/made-for-esphome-white-on-transparent.svg>`__, `png </_static/made-for-esphome-white-on-transparent.png>`__)
