guides/migrate_sonoff_tasmota.rst, before:

Migrating from Tasmota
======================

.. seo::
    :description: Migration guide for installing ESPHome on ESPs running Tasmota.
    :image: tasmota.svg

Migrating from previous Tasmota setups is very easy. You just need to have
ESPHome create a binary for you and then upload that in the Tasmota web interface.

Getting the Binary
------------------

First create a configuration for your device. Then, generate and download the firmware image:

Using the Home Assistant add-on/dashboard
`````````````````````````````````````````

From the card of your device: open **the three dots menu** and select **Install** option.

  .. figure:: images/dashboard-install.png

A new dialog will open. Click on **Manual download** option.

  .. figure:: images/dashboard-install-manual.png

Finally, choose **modern format** in the last dialog.

  .. figure:: images/dashboard-install-manual-modern.png

The build process of the firmware will start and the image will be automatically downloaded after its completion.

Using the command line
``````````````````````

From your configuration files folder, run 

:: 

  esphome <MY_DEVICE>.yaml compile
  
replacing ``<MY_DEVICE>.yaml`` with your configuration file and navigate to the ``<MY_DEVICE>/.pioenvs/<MY_DEVICE>/`` folder. 

There you will find a ``firmware.bin`` file. This is the binary that you will upload.

Uploading the Binary
--------------------

To upload the binary, navigate to the Tasmota web interface and enter the
"Firmware Upgrade" section.

.. figure:: images/tasmota_main.png
    :align: center
    :width: 60.0%

In the "Upgrade by file upload" section, choose the binary you previously downloaded

.. figure:: images/tasmota_ota.png
    :align: center
    :width: 60.0%

If everything succeeds, you will see an "Upload Successful" message and ESPHome
will connect to the WiFi network configured in your .yaml file. 🎉

.. figure:: images/tasmota_upload.png
    :align: center
    :width: 60.0%

Happy Hacking!

.. note::

    When using the :doc:`esp8266_pwm output </components/output/esp8266_pwm>` platform and
    switching from Tasmota, you need to power-cycle the device once. After that
    the dimming functionality will work as usual and no more power cycles are required.

About image size and ESP8266
----------------------------

    ESP8266 has very limited storage space. Trying to upload a large image will cause the
    upgrade process to fail.

    Tasmota 8.2 introduced upgrading using gzipped binaries which are smaller in size and
    make the upgrade process easier. 

    - If you are using Tasmota 8.2 or later (recommended) you probably will want to compress the firmware generated from ESPHome with ``gzip`` before uploading it.
    
    - If you are using any version older than 8.2: first upload ``tasmota-minimal.bin`` from Tasmota repository. Then upload the firmware generated from ESPHome. 
        - Alternatively, first upgrade Tasmota to the latest version. Then use the first (gzip, recommended) method.
    
    If you are using Tasmota 7.2+ it may be necessary to run the command ``SetOption78 1`` in the 
    Tasmota console and restart your device to be able to upgrade to esphome.


Automated migration from console
--------------------------------

You may also use Tasmota console to invoke the upgrade with just two commands:

:: 

  OtaUrl http://<MY-ESPHOME:6052>/download.bin?configuration=<MY_DEVICE>.yaml&type=firmware-factory.bin&compressed=1
  Upgrade 1

replacing ``http://<MY-ESPHOME:6052>/`` with the host and port of your ESPHome installation and ``<MY_DEVICE>.yaml``
with your device configuration file name.

If you need to use the uncompressed image for any reason, just remove ``&compressed=1`` from the above url.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/esp8266`
- :doc:`/components/esp32`
- :doc:`migrate_espurna`
- :doc:`migrate_espeasy`
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Warn users about ESP32 Tasmota v12 incompatibility (#3426)
* Warn users about ESP32 Tasmota v12 incompatibility

* Fixed underline

guides/migrate_sonoff_tasmota.rst, after:

Migrating from Tasmota
======================

.. seo::
    :description: Migration guide for installing ESPHome on ESPs running Tasmota.
    :image: tasmota.svg

Migrating from previous Tasmota setups is very easy. You just need to have
ESPHome create a binary for you and then upload that in the Tasmota web interface.

Incompatible versions
---------------------
WARNING! Migrating via OTA on ESP32, from Tasmota v12 (with boot partition) and up is currently not possible! Trying it could soft-brick your device!


Getting the Binary
------------------

First create a configuration for your device. Then, generate and download the firmware image:

Using the Home Assistant add-on/dashboard
`````````````````````````````````````````

From the card of your device: open **the three dots menu** and select **Install** option.

  .. figure:: images/dashboard-install.png

A new dialog will open. Click on **Manual download** option.

  .. figure:: images/dashboard-install-manual.png

Finally, choose **modern format** in the last dialog.

  .. figure:: images/dashboard-install-manual-modern.png

The build process of the firmware will start and the image will be automatically downloaded after its completion.

Using the command line
``````````````````````

From your configuration files folder, run 

:: 

  esphome <MY_DEVICE>.yaml compile
  
replacing ``<MY_DEVICE>.yaml`` with your configuration file and navigate to the ``<MY_DEVICE>/.pioenvs/<MY_DEVICE>/`` folder. 

There you will find a ``firmware.bin`` file. This is the binary that you will upload.

Uploading the Binary
--------------------

To upload the binary, navigate to the Tasmota web interface and enter the
"Firmware Upgrade" section.

.. figure:: images/tasmota_main.png
    :align: center
    :width: 60.0%

In the "Upgrade by file upload" section, choose the binary you previously downloaded

.. figure:: images/tasmota_ota.png
    :align: center
    :width: 60.0%

If everything succeeds, you will see an "Upload Successful" message and ESPHome
will connect to the WiFi network configured in your .yaml file. 🎉

.. figure:: images/tasmota_upload.png
    :align: center
    :width: 60.0%

Happy Hacking!

.. note::

    When using the :doc:`esp8266_pwm output </components/output/esp8266_pwm>` platform and
    switching from Tasmota, you need to power-cycle the device once. After that
    the dimming functionality will work as usual and no more power cycles are required.

About image size and ESP8266
----------------------------

    ESP8266 has very limited storage space. Trying to upload a large image will cause the
    upgrade process to fail.

    Tasmota 8.2 introduced upgrading using gzipped binaries which are smaller in size and
    make the upgrade process easier. 

    - If you are using Tasmota 8.2 or later (recommended) you probably will want to compress the firmware generated from ESPHome with ``gzip`` before uploading it.
    
    - If you are using any version older than 8.2: first upload ``tasmota-minimal.bin`` from Tasmota repository. Then upload the firmware generated from ESPHome. 
        - Alternatively, first upgrade Tasmota to the latest version. Then use the first (gzip, recommended) method.
    
    If you are using Tasmota 7.2+ it may be necessary to run the command ``SetOption78 1`` in the 
    Tasmota console and restart your device to be able to upgrade to esphome.


Automated migration from console
--------------------------------

You may also use Tasmota console to invoke the upgrade with just two commands:

:: 

  OtaUrl http://<MY-ESPHOME:6052>/download.bin?configuration=<MY_DEVICE>.yaml&type=firmware-factory.bin&compressed=1
  Upgrade 1

replacing ``http://<MY-ESPHOME:6052>/`` with the host and port of your ESPHome installation and ``<MY_DEVICE>.yaml``
with your device configuration file name.

If you need to use the uncompressed image for any reason, just remove ``&compressed=1`` from the above url.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/esp8266`
- :doc:`/components/esp32`
- :doc:`migrate_espurna`
- :doc:`migrate_espeasy`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
