cookbook/power_meter.rst, before:

Non-Invasive Power Meter
========================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for hacking your power meter at home to measure your power usage.
    :image: power_meter.jpg

So an essential part of making your home smart is knowing how much power it uses over the day. Tracking this can be difficult, often you need to install a completely new power meter which can often cost a bunch of money. However, quite a few power meters have a red LED on the front that blinks every time that one Wh has been used.

The simple idea therefore is: Why don't we just abuse that functionality to make the power-meter IoT enabled? We just have to hook up a simple photoresistor in front of that aforementioned LED and track the amount of pulses we receive. Then using ESPHome we can instantly have the power meter show up in Home Assistant 🎉

Hooking it all up is quite easy: Just buy a suitable photoresistor (make sure the wave length approximately matches the one from your power meter). Then connect it using a simple variable resistor divider (see `this article <https://blog.udemy.com/arduino-ldr/>`__ for inspiration). And... that should already be it :)

.. figure:: images/power_meter-header.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 80.0%

.. note::

    Some energy meters have an exposed `S0 port <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S_interface/>`__ (which essentially just is a switch that closes), if that is the case the photodiode can be replaced with the following connection.

    .. code-block::

        S0 ------------ VCC
        S0 --+-- 10k -- GND
        .    |
        .    +--------- GPIO12

For ESPHome, you can then use the :doc:`pulse meter sensor </components/sensor/pulse_meter>` using below configuration:

.. code-block:: yaml

    sensor:
      - platform: pulse_meter
        name: 'Power'
        id: sensor_pulse_meter # Optional ID, necessary if you want to calculate the total daily energy
        unit_of_measurement: 'W'
        device_class: power
        state_class: measurement
        accuracy_decimals: 0
        pin: GPIO12
        filters:
          - multiply: 6 # (60s / impulse constant) * (1000W / 1kW)

Adjust ``GPIO12`` to match your set up of course. The output from the pulse counter sensor is in ``pulses/min`` and we also know that 10000 pulses from the LED should equal 1kWh of power usage. Thus, rearranging the expression yields a proportional factor of ``6`` from ``pulses/min`` to ``W``.

.. note::

    The ``pulse_meter`` sensor sends an update every time a pulse is detected. This can quickly lead to sub-second updates which can be a bit much for Home Assistant to handle. To avoid this, you can use the ``average_throttle`` filter to only send updates up to a desired interval:

    .. code-block:: yaml

        sensor:
          - platform: pulse_meter
            # ...
            filters:
              - average_throttle: 10s
              - filter_out: NaN


.. note::

    Photoresistors often have a bit of noise during their switching phases. So in certain situations, a single power meter tick can result in many pulses being counted. This effect is especially big on ESP8266s. If you're experiencing this, try enabling the ``internal_filter:`` filter option:

    .. code-block:: yaml

        sensor:
          - platform: pulse_meter
            # ...
            internal_filter: 10us


    More details on this and how to calculate the correct value can be found in the :doc:`pulse meter sensor </components/sensor/pulse_meter>` documentation.


If a technician shows up and he looks confused about what the heck you have done to your power meter, tell them about ESPHome 😉


Counting total generated energy
-------------------------------

When the total sensor is configured, ``pulse_meter`` also reports the total
number of pulses measured. When used on a power meter, this can be used to
measure the total transmitted energy in ``kWh``.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: pulse_meter
      # ...
        total:
          name: "Electricity Total"
          unit_of_measurement: "kWh"
          device_class: energy
          state_class: total_increasing
          accuracy_decimals: 3
          filters:
            - multiply: 0.001  # (1/1000 pulses per kWh)
            # - average_throttle: 10s
            # - filter_out: NaN



(Re)Setting the total energy value
----------------------------------

Using this action, you are able to reset/set the total pulse count. This can be useful
if you would like the ``total`` sensor to match what you see on your meter you are
trying to match.

.. code-block:: yaml

    api:
      services:
        - service: set_total
          variables:
            new_total: int
          then:
            - pulse_counter.set_total_pulses:
                id: sensor_pulse_meter
                value: !lambda 'return new_total * 1000;'

.. note::

    If you just want to set the total pulse count instead of the total energy, you can remove the multiplication by 1000.


Tracking Total Daily Energy
---------------------------

Additionally you can also calculate the total daily energy generated, for which you can use the :doc:`Total Daily Energy </components/sensor/total_daily_energy>` using below configuration:

.. code-block:: yaml

    sensor:
     #(...)
      - platform: total_daily_energy
        name: 'Total Daily Energy'
        id: sensor_total_daily_energy
        power_id: sensor_energy_pulse_meter
        unit_of_measurement: 'kWh'
        state_class: total_increasing
        device_class: energy
        accuracy_decimals: 3
        filters:
          # Multiplication factor from W to kW is 0.001
          - multiply: 0.001
    
    time:
      - platform: homeassistant
        id: homeassistant_time

While you can in theory also do this with the home assistant `integration <https://www.home-assistant.io/integrations/integration/>`__ integration, the benefit of this is that it continues to integrate the power during times home assistant is unable to work with values, i.e. during updates, restarts and so on.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/sensor/pulse_counter`
- :doc:`/components/sensor/pulse_meter`
- :doc:`/components/sensor/total_daily_energy`
- :doc:`/components/time/homeassistant`
- `Home Assistant Glow 🌟 <https://github.com/klaasnicolaas/home-assistant-glow/>`__.
- :ghedit:`Edit`

Commit message:

Made pulse_meter more implementation agnostic and moved power meter relevant information to the cookbook.

cookbook/power_meter.rst, after:

Non-Invasive Power Meter
========================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for hacking your power meter at home to measure your power usage.
    :image: power_meter.jpg

So an essential part of making your home smart is knowing how much power it uses over the day. Tracking this can be difficult, often you need to install a completely new power meter which can often cost a bunch of money. However, quite a few power meters have a red LED on the front that blinks every time that one Wh has been used.

The simple idea therefore is: Why don't we just abuse that functionality to make the power-meter IoT enabled? We just have to hook up a simple photoresistor in front of that aforementioned LED and track the amount of pulses we receive. Then using ESPHome we can instantly have the power meter show up in Home Assistant 🎉

Hooking it all up is quite easy: Just buy a suitable photoresistor (make sure the wave length approximately matches the one from your power meter). Then connect it using a simple variable resistor divider (see `this article <https://blog.udemy.com/arduino-ldr/>`__ for inspiration). And... that should already be it :)

.. figure:: images/power_meter-header.jpg
    :align: center
    :width: 80.0%

.. note::

    Some energy meters have an exposed `S0 port <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S_interface/>`__ (which essentially just is a switch that closes), if that is the case the photodiode can be replaced with the following connection.

    .. code-block::

        S0 ------------ VCC
        S0 --+-- 10k -- GND
        .    |
        .    +--------- GPIO12

For ESPHome, you can then use the :doc:`pulse meter sensor </components/sensor/pulse_meter>` using below configuration:

.. code-block:: yaml

    sensor:
      - platform: pulse_meter
        name: 'Power'
        id: sensor_pulse_meter # Optional ID, necessary if you want to calculate the total daily energy
        unit_of_measurement: 'W'
        device_class: power
        state_class: measurement
        accuracy_decimals: 0
        pin: GPIO12
        filters:
          - multiply: 6 # (60s / impulse constant) * (1000W / 1kW)

Adjust ``GPIO12`` to match your set up of course. The output from the pulse counter sensor is in ``pulses/min`` and we also know that 10000 pulses from the LED should equal 1kWh of power usage. Thus, rearranging the expression yields a proportional factor of ``6`` from ``pulses/min`` to ``W``.

.. note::

    The ``pulse_meter`` sensor sends an update every time a pulse is detected. This can quickly lead to sub-second updates which can be a bit much for Home Assistant to handle. To avoid this, you can use the ``average_throttle`` filter to only send updates up to a desired interval:

    .. code-block:: yaml

        sensor:
          - platform: pulse_meter
            # ...
            filters:
              - average_throttle: 10s
              - filter_out: NaN


.. note::

    The ``pulse_meter`` sensor has an internal filter that is used to debounce the input signal. This filter is set to ``13us`` by default. To increase the safety margin, you can increase this value. For this you need to know the *minimum pulse width* that you can expect to see from your power meter within the expected load range.

    The minimum pulse width threshold is determined by considering the upper limit of the *load* the meter is designed to handle, as well as the meter's *impulse constant* (``x pulses / kWh``). Here's the calculation involved:

    - **Load Limit in Watts**: Establish the *upper load limit* that the meter is designed to measure. For example, if the limit is 16 kW (16,000 Watts), this becomes a reference point.

    - **Pulse Rate Calculation**: Determine the pulse rate corresponding to this load limit. For this we need to know the impulse constant. In our example, the power meter has an impulse constant of ``10000 pulses/kWh``. Dividing both sides by 60s gives us ``166.67 pulses/s = 60 kWs``. This means that ``60 kWs`` corresponds to 1,000 impulses per 6 seconds, or 166.67 impulses per second. Scaling this down to 16 kW, we get ``16 kWs = 44.44 Pulses/s``  (or 400 pulses per 9 seconds). This is the upper bound of the pulse rate we expect to see.

    - **Minimum Pulse Width Calculation**: Use the pulse rate to calculate the minimum pulse width threshold. Employ the formula: ``Minimum Pulse Width (seconds) = Time Period / Number of Pulses``. In our example, with a time period of 9 seconds and 400 pulses, the minimum pulse width we expect to see is approximately 22.5 milliseconds. This means you don't want to increase the internal filter time above ``22.5ms``, or you will start to miss pulses within the expected load range.

    .. code-block:: yaml

        sensor:
          - platform: pulse_meter
            # ...
            internal_filter: 22.5ms


If a technician shows up and he looks confused about what the heck you have done to your power meter, tell them about ESPHome 😉


Counting total generated energy
-------------------------------

When the total sensor is configured, ``pulse_meter`` also reports the total
number of pulses measured. When used on a power meter, this can be used to
measure the total transmitted energy in ``kWh``.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    sensor:
      - platform: pulse_meter
      # ...
        total:
          name: "Electricity Total"
          unit_of_measurement: "kWh"
          device_class: energy
          state_class: total_increasing
          accuracy_decimals: 3
          filters:
            - multiply: 0.0001  # (1/10000 pulses per kWh)
            # - average_throttle: 10s
            # - filter_out: NaN



(Re)Setting the total energy value
----------------------------------

Using this action, you are able to reset/set the total pulse count. This can be useful
if you would like the ``total`` sensor to match what you see on your meter you are
trying to match.

.. code-block:: yaml

    api:
      services:
        - service: set_total
          variables:
            new_total: int
          then:
            - pulse_counter.set_total_pulses:
                id: sensor_pulse_meter
                value: !lambda 'return new_total * 1000;'


Tracking Total Daily Energy
---------------------------

Additionally you can also calculate the total daily energy generated, for which you can use the :doc:`Total Daily Energy </components/sensor/total_daily_energy>` using below configuration:

.. code-block:: yaml

    sensor:
     #(...)
      - platform: total_daily_energy
        name: 'Total Daily Energy'
        id: sensor_total_daily_energy
        power_id: sensor_energy_pulse_meter
        unit_of_measurement: 'kWh'
        state_class: total_increasing
        device_class: energy
        accuracy_decimals: 3
        filters:
          # Multiplication factor from W to kW is 0.001
          - multiply: 0.001
    
    time:
      - platform: homeassistant
        id: homeassistant_time

While you can in theory also do this with the home assistant `integration <https://www.home-assistant.io/integrations/integration/>`__ integration, the benefit of this is that it continues to integrate the power during times home assistant is unable to work with values, i.e. during updates, restarts and so on.

See Also
--------

- :doc:`/components/sensor/pulse_counter`
- :doc:`/components/sensor/pulse_meter`
- :doc:`/components/sensor/total_daily_energy`
- :doc:`/components/time/homeassistant`
- `Home Assistant Glow 🌟 <https://github.com/klaasnicolaas/home-assistant-glow/>`__.
- :ghedit:`Edit`
